url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC-Bruno-C4AI/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/Capitulo%20de%20Livro%20de%20medicina%20sobre%20eeg%20artifact%20removal.pdf


6. Artifact removal
A substantial portion of the electrical signals recorded from EEG systems
originate from outside the brain (Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006; Whitham et al., 2007). For
example, in some areas on the head, close to the ears, eyes, and neck, we expect electrical
signals originating in the cortex to have magnitude as much as 200 times lower than 
1
3
electrical signals from muscle activity (Fitzgibbon et al., 2015). Furthermore, movement
of the head will generate artifacts over a large number of electrodes. Potentials generated
from sources other than cortical activity are dubbed artifact, and a major challenge in
EEG analysis is to detect these signals and remove them from EEG recordings.
Artifact can either be biological in nature, such as muscle activity, or due to
environmental factors such as electric fields caused by the common AC standard and
temporary potential shifts due to movement. Biological artifact is typically caused by
electrical potentials generated by muscle activity. The recording of muscle activity is
known as electromyography (EMG) and typically originates from the eyes, face, and
neck, but also from muscles all over the body (Whitham et al., 2007). Another source of
common artifact is the rhythmic beating of arteries in the temples or neck and potentials
from distant but large muscles in the heart (electrocardiography or EKG). Transient
muscle artifact can be due to head movements, eye blinks, lateral eye-movement, or jaw
clenching; all of which may display different spatio-temporal patterns of potentials on the
scalp.
In order to better draw inference about brain activity, multiple procedures have
been developed to reduce the contribution of artifact in EEG recordings. Ocular artifact
such as eye blinks and lateral eye movements can be automatically removed using
regression methods (Gratton et al., 1983). In a typical ocular regression method,
electrodes are placed near the eyes to record electrooculographic (EOG) signals,
potentials generated by musculature associated with the eyes. The effect of these EOG
signals on the other EEG channels is then estimated with linear regression. The total
influence of the EOG signals on the EEG is then removed by subtracting the product of
the EOG signals and the regression coefficient estimates (Schlögl et al., 2007).
Independent Component Analysis (ICA; Bell & Sejnowski, 1995) has become an
important tool for identifying and removing artifact. Independent component analysis
(ICA) refers to a class of blind source-separation algorithms used to decompose linear
mixtures of data. For example, some ICA algorithms find linear mixtures of variables that
are maximally non-Gaussian by searching for mixtures with either minimum mutual
information or maximum kurtosis (Makeig et al. 1996; Jung et al., 1998). In practice
these methods often yield non-normal mixtures that have distributions with outliers. The 
1
4
two most widely used algorithms in the EEG literature are the FastICA (Hyvärinen &
Oja, 1997) and InfoMax ICA (Bell & Sejnowski, 1995; Delorme & Makeig, 2002).
ICA assumes that there is a linear mixture of the EEG data V (a channels c by
time t matrix) such that the independent components M (a component k by time t matrix)
are given by
M W V
1

where W-1
is the matrix consisting of k by c weights. Some of
the resulting components have been shown to well represent some specific types of
artifact (Delorme et al. 2007). The components evaluated to reflect artifact can then be
removed from the data by inverting the equation using a reduced matrix WL to remove the
artifact components.
There are two caveats with this approach. First, the identification of the artifact
component is inherently a subjective judgement. Some artifact sources are easy to
identify such as eye blinks, eye movements, and temporary electrical discontinuities
(perhaps due to a reference electrode or ground electrode displacement during head
movement). But artifacts due to muscle are far more subtle. Second, the effect of
reducing the number of sources in M is to reduce the rank of the data matrix, which
potentially influences further analysis by reducing the amount of possible EEG mixtures.
To perform an ICA based artifact removal procedure, the continuous recording is
first split into 1-3 second epochs, usually based on the trial structure of the experiment in
cognitive experiments. Epochs that obviously contain artifact rather than EEG, usually
due to gross movements by the subject, can then be rejected by visual inspection, or by
examining trials with high variance compared to other trials. Not removing this one-off
data hinders the ability of the ICA algorithm to isolate typical artifacts such as eye blinks.
After this “precleaning” step, an algorithm is run with the EEG data as input to obtain an
ICA decomposition.
Typical graphical representations of Independent Components (ICs) are
topographic maps of the inverse weights, component spectra, and component time series
or average component time series across epochs. Figure 4 provides typical graphical
representations of the 12 components that describe the most variance in a subject's EEG
data using InfoMax ICA. The EEG was collected from a subject at rest who fixated on a
cross on a monitor for 42 seconds. Due to properties of the weight matrix W (columns
represented as the circular head plots in Figure 4 corresponding to each component), the 
1
5
component spectra and the component time series, we identified 4 components that could
be indicative of artifact. Component 1 (IC1) most likely captures the electrical potentials
due to eye blinks. Indicative of eye blinks, the channel weights indicate that all the
component information is located near the eyes. The power spectrum has one peak in a
low frequency band because the time series has high amplitude waveforms located
sparsely in time (which occur once per blink). IC12 is probably muscle artifact, perhaps
due to facial tension. It contributes to the EEG recording mainly at peripheral electrodes,
and its spectrum has high power at high frequencies and low power at typical resting
EEG frequencies (such as alpha rhythm, around 10 Hz). Furthermore, the topography’s
spatial frequency is too high (i.e. too focal) as this spatial frequency is near impossible
for EEG to obtain due to the properties of head volume conduction which acts as a lowpass spatial filter. Similarly, IC6 captures data that cannot be due to brain activity
because its weight is only at one electrode and the power spectrum exhibits a 1/f
frequency falloff (a property of electrical “pink” noise). As indicated by its time course,
this component is probably a mix of a temporary electrical discontinuity at about 6
seconds and a horizontal eye movement at about 12 seconds. IC7 is similar in its
properties to IC6 and captures only a temporary electrical discontinuity at 41 seconds.
The rest of the ICs most likely reflect cortical electrical activity or mixtures of cortical
electrical activity and muscle artifact. These ICs contain peaks in alpha (8-13 Hz) and/or
beta frequency bands (13-20 Hz) and have lower spatial frequency distributions typical of
EEG.
We recommend keeping EEG and artifact mixtures in the data unless very
specific properties of the EEG are of interest a priori. There is empirical evidence to
suggest that ICA algorithms do not isolate many types of muscle artifact, especially task
related artifact, and thus rejecting ICs that do not clearly represent artifact becomes very
subjective (Shackman et al., 2009). Furthermore, the efficacy of ICA to reduce all EMG
artifact remains controversial at best (Olbrich et al., 2011; McMenamin et al., 2011).
However if one must analyze a dataset that has a large quantity of muscle artifact, there
may be a few indicators of EEG data that do not originate in the brain. For instance, an IC
representing EEG or an EEG-EMG mixture may have a constant distribution of sample
variances over all trials if the subject is in the same cognitive state and is doing the same 
1
6
task. In contrast, irregular EMG components will typically only have large variances on
only a few trials.
In order to reduce subjectivity of the artifact independent component (IC) removal
process and reduce the time demand on performing artifact removal, some progress has
been made on automatic rejection of artifact components. ADJUST is an algorithm that
uses properties of the components such as spatial weight distributions on the scalp,
variance, and kurtosis of the components’ potentials to automatically label components as
eye blinks, vertical eye movements, horizontal eye movies, or generic potential
discontinuities so that they can be subtracted from the recording (Mognon et al., 2011)
No known modern artifact correction technique is perfect for muscle artifact
removal, and no EEG recording is completely immune to muscle artifact (Whitham et al.,
2007). This is particularly the case for the neck and face muscle variety; thus, good
recording and analysis practices are still the best approach for reducing artifact in EEG
recordings. Subjects should be told to remain still and minimize jaw clenching, and the
electrode cap or net should be positioned tightly (but comfortably) on the subject. Muscle
artifact exhibits broadband frequency spectra with substantial relative power above 15
Hz; therefore analyses of the delta (1-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-13 Hz) and mu (11-
14 Hz) bands are typically more robust to muscle artifact contamination. 