
-------------------------

title: Electroencephalography as a post-stroke assessment method: An updated review

doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nrleng.2014.07.004

notes:

although many subjects partially recover lower
limb motor function, most of them cannot perform activities of daily living with the affected upper limb (UL) after
months of rehabilitation. Impairment of
the UL significantly limits the patient’s level of activity and
both physical and social interactions.

Considering the results
on these scales, the greatest potential for recovery is
reached between the second and fifth months after stroke.
Prospects for functional recovery after 6 months are considered limited

Recovery after stroke constitutes one of the main enigmas
of the neurosciences

a significant
effort has been made to research changes to the central
nervous system after stroke in order to establish more accurate prognoses and develop new strategies promoting motor
rehabilitation

researchers have managed to determine the
changes induced by the application of new and groundbreaking rehabilitation approaches, such as robotics,17 music
therapy, and TMS (transcrnaial magnetic stimulus).

According to the scientific literature, changes
contributing to motor rehabilitation can be found in both
hemispheres. 

On the one hand, various authors have shown
that the presence of motor evoked potentials (MEPs) triggered by TMS is a predictor of motor rehabilitation.20,21 On
the other hand, some authors suggest that the plasticity
associated with compensatory movements may contribute to
maladaptive plasticity.

These findings suggest that a lack
of MEPs  (Motor evoked potential) during the earliest stages does not indicate a poor
prognosis, that both hemispheres contribute to recovery
42 E. Monge-Pereira et al.
during different stages, and that recovery after stroke is
more dynamic than was once believed.

Cramer et al.27
observed that decreased activity in fMRI studies of the ipsilesional cortex during movements of the paretic hand was
actually associated with greater functional gains 6 weeks
after rehabilitation in chronic-phase stroke patients

Therefore, there seems to be a negative association
between functional outcomes and the degree of activity in
the ipsilateral hemisphere during a motor task.

In this way, they demonstrated
that the motor rehabilitation was mainly linked to improvement of motor apraxia and that the corticospinal tract was
not impaired

The 2 studies published in 2008 and 2010 by Formaggio et al.30,31 combined fMRI and electroencephalography
(EEG) to study the blood-oxygenation-level dependent signal and changes in brain oscillatory activity in motor areas
associated with physiological and pathological events. These
studies reported a significant correlation with both finger movements and motor imagery tasks as they observed
a decreased event-related desynchronisation (ERD) in the
 and  bands in the contralateral hemisphere during
performance of the motor or motor imagery task. This
decrease is associated with blood-oxygen-level dependent activation in the same areas. This combination
provided useful information helping identify the regions
contributing to changes in electrical responses more
accurately.

In summary, neuroimaging techniques have important
implications in terms of diagnosis and clinical decisionmaking.2

However, these tools are not always accessible
to everyone, since they are expensive and have contraindications and limited availability.

EEG is commonly used to diagnose vascular epilepsy
secondary to stroke in adults; it lets physicians study
the characteristics and clinical outcomes of patients, as
well as analyse the effectiveness of different antiepileptic treatments.33 Furthermore, EEG is typically used as
a monitoring method during carotid endarterectomy to
detect cerebral ischaemia, which causes an ipsilateral voltage attenuation.34 EEG is also performed to assess coma
and pseudocoma states and differentiate them from other
states of consciousness,35 as well as to confirm brain
death.

we will attempt to answer the following unresolved questions: could EEG be a useful tool for
increasing knowledge of the patterns of cortical changes
after stroke? Could it constitute a diagnostic method in
clinical practice? Could it be used as an objective tool for
determining stroke patients’ outcomes? And lastly, can EEG
shed light on the effectiveness of traditional rehabilitation
interventions?

A motor event generates various responses within the
neuronal structures of the brain. On the one hand, it provokes slow movement-related cortical potentials (MRCP)
which represent the electroencephalographic evidence of
the participation of motor cortex during movement and conscious preparation for the intentional movement.47 On the
other hand, it causes changes in the amplitude of cortical oscillatory activity. In general terms, there are 2 types
of cortical oscillations related to motor behaviour: the
and  rhythms. Motor-related changes in the  and
frequencies result in ERD or event-related synchronisation
(ERS).The ERS represents an increase in the amplitude of
 and  frequencies, whereas ERD represents a decrease

According to the cortical region in question,  frequency
presents specific characteristics and has a set nomenclature. Mu () rhythm is located around the central sulcus
(primary sensorimotor cortices). Mu rhythms present a particular reactivity, since they occur at rest and resolve with
contralateral limb movements. They are particularly pronounced around the area of the motor cortex associated
with the hand and resolve when making a fist, or even during motor imagery tasks.50 They are regarded as intrinsic
activity of the central region and are thus very useful in the
functional evaluation of stroke patients.

Low amplitude  activity presents frequencies of 14 to
30 Hz and indicates mental activity and attention.37 Maximum  amplitude is observed in the fronto-central regions.
The most significant finding in the analysis of  activity
is interhemispheric asymmetry. A decrease in amplitude
in one of the hemispheres tends to indicate presence of
alterations

Amplitude of oscillatory activity decreases when frequency increases. Therefore,  rhythm with a frequency of
8 to 13 Hz has a higher amplitude than  activity. Furthermore, oscillation amplitude is proportional to the number
of synchronised active neurons, so that lower oscillations
involve more neurons than faster oscillations

In general, sensory stimulation and the actual movement
or motor imagery task will result in ERD or ERS of mu and beta
rhythms. Movement is preceded by ERD in healthy subjects,
and as the movement is carried out, variations occur in the
synchronisation of cortical rhythms (ERS). Movement offset
is followed by a mu-ERS generated in the precentral region,
which reflects a deactivation of motor cortex. This occurs in
the first second after termination of voluntary movement,
when the mu rhythm still presents a low-amplitude ERD. Bilateral movements cause bilateral activation.54

mu-ERD does not depend on movement duration or localisation, and it is the same for movements of the index, the
thumb, or even the hand. This suggests that mu-ERD is due to a
non-specific preactivation of neurons in the motor areas. In
this line, studies with electrocorticography have shown that
beta-ERD is more discrete than mu-ERD. Likewise, it is located in
the prerolandic cortex, a more anterior area (motor area),
whereas mu-ERD is located in the postrolandic area (primary
somatosensory cortex)

ERD and ERS can take place simultaneously, both in
activity and  beta activity. In the first case, during perception
of a visual stimulus, occipital alfa-ERD and mu-ERS of central rhythms can be observed in EEG recordings. However,
occipital alfa-ERS and central mu-ERD occur during self-initiated
voluntary movements.56 A possible explanation would be the
involvement of thalamic structures which activate cortical
structures engaged in some movements while deactivating
others not involved in the task. At the beta activity level,
ERD and ERS take place simultaneously during a hand motor
imagery task, which activates a contralateral ERD and ipsilateral ERS.

For ERD/ERS calculations using EEG at movement onset,
variations of power in mu and beta bands are expressed with
reference to a value calculated in a reference time period,
always taken at rest, long before the movement is to
be performed, in order to remain as neutral as possible

## SLOW MRCP (Movement relatd corrtical potential)

MRCP are especially relevant in the assessment of cortical activation patterns, since they are associated with
movement planning and execution. This being the case,
Bereitschaftspotential (BP) will require a special mention
as they are considered the initial stage of MRCPs.
This parameter, introduced by Kornhuber and Deecke in
1964, is an electrical signal corresponding to the supplementary motor area, which activates before the primary
motor area.59 This is a slow and negative potential which
reflects the preparatory activity and whose maximum peak
coincides with voluntary movement.60 BP has 2 components:
an early component initiating 2 seconds before the movement starts, and a late component, which appears 400 ms
before the movement itself. Early BP is maximal at the
midline of the central parietal area, and widely and symmetrically distributed across both hemispheres. Late BP is
much larger over the right central region (contralateral to
the movement) (Fig. 2). In general terms, when a movement pattern is present, the BP commonly starts much
earlier, compared to movements executed in more natural
conditions.

Although the mechanisms generating BP are yet to
be understood, these potentials are modulated by the
way the task is performed. Multiple factors influence the
type of BP: the preparatory state, movement selection

(free or repeated pattern), learning acquisition, movement repetition rhythm, practice, difficulty, speed, and
pathological lesion in brain structures, among others.
*Neurological changes modify the time of appearance and
amplitude of MRCPs; as such, they can be useful in diagnosis
and follow-up*.

## Characteristics of cortical activity in stroke
patients measured with EEG

- table of eeg markers summarizes this section (ta no word)

acute stroke is less than 8 days of progression

-------------------------

title: Using EEG to Predict the Rehabilitation Outcome of Stroke Patients


url: https://www.archives-pmr.org/article/S0003-9993(14)00521-8/pdf

notes:

Dynamic causal modelling of induced response (DCM_IR).
Output from DCM_IR then entered the classifier for training and classification.

Results: The statistic analysis on the F-M UE, TEMPA and WMFT suggests a significant treatment 
effect for all patients. The classification result
using the DCM results of pre-rehab EEG from good recovery and general
recovery patients is 90.1% accurate in average

Conclusions: The very high prediction (classification) accuracy in this
study suggests that the brain activities can serve as a good/ reliable predictor at enrollment and 
may help to facilitate the proper treatment/
discharge plan for the physicians and to prepare the home adjustment and
community support for patients’ families.


-------------------------

title: An exploration of EEG features during recovery following stroke – implications for 
BCI-mediated neurorehabilitation therapy

doi: https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-11-9

notes:

BCI point of view

BCIs are typically used by subjects with no damage to the brain therefore relatively little is known 
about the technical requirements 
for the design of a rehabilitative BCI for stroke.

An off-line BCI design based on Filter Bank Common Spatial Patterns (FBCSP) was implemented to test 
and compare the efficacy and accuracy 
of training a rehabilitative BCI with both stroke-affected and healthy data.

When training a BCI with healthy EEG, average classification accuracy of stroke-affected EEG is lower 
than the average for healthy EEG. 
*Classification accuracy of the late session stroke EEG is improved by training the BCI on the corresponding early stroke EEG dataset*.

This exploratory study illustrates that stroke and the accompanying neuroplastic changes associated 
with the recovery process can cause significant 
inter-subject changes in the EEG features suitable for mapping as part of a neurofeedback therapy, 
even when individuals have scored largely similar 
with conventional behavioural measures. *It appears such measures can mask this individual 
variability in cortical reorganization*. Consequently we believe 
motor retraining BCI should initially be tailored to individual patients.

A rehabilitative BCI in this context should encourage and reward the subject for attempted movement, 
to encourage positive neuroplastic changes in the brain 
and facilitate recovery of motor control

The work here is predicated on the attempted movement paradigm, which seeks to provide positive 
reinforcement feedback in response to successful engagement of 
the patient’s motor networks associated with the targeted motor task. It is speculated that such 
an approach can help reduce the possibility of the learned non-use 
phenomenon through the delivery of contingent rewards - a form of neurofeedback therapy 

A typical stroke sufferer for whom this technology is potentially useful will obviously have very 
limited ability to manipulate a device precisely and accurately 
on to their head unaided and therefore any solution must be tolerant to such setup errors. 
In addition it is well established that stroke sufferers fatigue very 
easily [14–17] and therefore in order to maximize therapy during a session minimal (and ideally zero) 
time should be lost to training the classifier.

Finally, as stroke is an injury to the brain, the stereotypical patterns of brain activity upon 
which conventional BCI paradigms rely are not guaranteed to manifest 
themselves conventionally in response to movement intentions and therefore it is not clear how 
best the BCI should use the signals presented by the user. To compound 
this latter aspect further, it is not clear how the EEG of the recovering brain will resolve 
over time, which has ramifications in terms of pattern recognition and 
subsequent interpretation.

If BCI trained with healthy stereotypical data provides sufficiently good performance with 
stroke sufferers then such a deployment paradigm would make BCI for stroke 
rehabilitation far more practical 
in a clinical setting. If, on the other hand, the stroke-affected EEG presents sufficiently 
differently from healthy EEG or that it changes over time, the practical 
application of BCI in such a context 
will require more sophisticated design from a machine learning perspective. The study here 
attempts to shed some light on this pragmatic issue.

Fifteen subjects in total participated in the study. Ten subjects were healthy while five were stroke patients.

Stroke subjects took part in two recording sessions - an “early” session which took place up to 
6 weeks following stroke onset and a “late” session which took place roughly
6 months after the early session. Healthy subjects only participated in one recording session.

A session consisted of 20 activation trials and 20 rest trials, beginning with activation and 
alternating until all 40 trials had been completed. Each trial lasted 10 
seconds with no rest time between trials (see Figure 2)

Recorded EEG data was processed off-line in Matlab 7 (Mathworks, Natick, Maine, USA) using a 
combination of scripts from EEGLAB [20], Ramussen and Williams’ GPML code [21] and custom code.

We implemented an off-line BCI based on Filter Bank Common Spatial Patterns (FBCSP) [22] as illustrated in Figure 3. 
FBCSP is an adaptation of the Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) algorithm [23]. The general steps of FBCSP are:
	1. Filter the EEG into a number of frequency ranges.
	2. Apply the CSP algorithm separately to each frequency range, decompose the EEG and perform feature extraction.
	3. Train or test the classifier.


In our case we used Marginal Relevance (MRelv) to rank our features and Gaussian Process 
Classification (GPC) to classify the selected features. 
More detail on CSP, MRelv and GPC is provided in following sections.

Two types of BCI training were explored in our investigation: individual and grouped. 
For individual BCI training, only one EEG dataset was used 
to train the BCI (“Train EEG”). Training the BCI in this way involved obtaining the CSP 
filters, ranking and selecting the CSP features and using 
them to train the classifier, all from a single EEG dataset. Another EEG dataset was used 
to test the BCI (“Test EEG”). This involved filtering the EEG, 
applying the trained CSP model, selecting the same features as before and classifying the 
features with the classifier trained beforehand. For grouped BCI training, 
all event data from a subset of datasets was used to obtain a general CSP model. As before, 
this model is applied to all of the training data, the resulting CSP filters 
are ranked, selected and finally used to train the classifier. This general CSP and feature 
selection model is then applied to other individual EEG datasets and the resulting 
CSP features are classified.

Raw EEG data was temporally filtered with a filter bank made up of 9 frequency ranges. 
A zero-phase 4th-order Butterworth filter was used to filter the EEG signals into the
 frequency ranges 4-8, 8-12, 12-16, 16-20, 20-24, 24-28, 28-32, 32-36 and 36-40 Hz. 
This filtered EEG was then separated into windowed time segments for each trial of rest and 
activity. 
Segments began 2 seconds following the trial onset and lasted 6 seconds as shown in Figure 2.

imporatne: o CSP (aplicado no raw EEG para varios intervalos de freq) aplica apenas um atransofrmacao
 linear nos canais do eeg
o output sao novos sinais (mesmo numero do numerod de canais). size input = size output

- coloquei no word a parte matematica

##Marginal relevance

For this study, we chose to use Marginal Relevance (MRelv) as our feature ranking method. 
The MRelv score for each feature in a feature set (vT1,vT2,⋯vTbt) is the ratio of their 
between-group to within-group sum of squares. 
This idea underpins statistical methodologies such as ANOVA and is explained in more detail 
elsewhere [25] where it was used to screen out features when a large number of spurious 
features are present.

The spatial filters for each CSP channel (rows of W) have a corresponding spatial filter within 
the same filter set at a mirrored location (por causa da simetria do cerebro) within 
the filter set W. Using both filters together offers 
the best classification results - for example, the 1st and last rows of W should be used together 
or the 3rd and 3rd-from-last rows. 
Accordingly, we selected the four highest ranked features [22] and their corresponding features 
for classifier training. This feature selection was then used during the subsequent 
BCI testing stage.

##Gaussian process classification

The Gaussian process (GP) model is an example of the use of a flexible, probabilistic, 
non-parametric model with uncertainty predictions. It fits naturally in the Bayesian modelling 
framework in which, instead of parameterising a mapping function f(x), 
a prior is placed directly on the space of possible functions f(x) which could represent 
the nonlinear mapping from input 
vector x to output y. Its use and properties for modelling are reviewed in [26, 27]. 
Various applications (e.g. [28, 29] in medicine and bioengineering fields) have exploited different 
properties of GP models for regression problems. In the field of geostatistics 
GP regression models are used for probabilistic analysis of data and are more commonly known under the term “Kriging”. 
A GP is a generalization of the Gaussian probability distribution.

Beside regression, GP models can also be used for probabilistic classification [27, 30, 31]. 
In the case of classification the output data, y, are no longer connected simply to the 
underlying function, f, as in the case of regression, but are discrete. 
Since the classification is binary, variable y can have one value for one class and another for 
the other class, e.g. y∈{1,−1}. 
The classification of a new data point x∗ involves two steps instead of one. In the first step, 
a latent function f, which models qualitatively with a GP model how the likelihood of 
one class versus the other changes over the x axis, is evaluated. 
In the second step, the output of the latent function f is squashed onto the range [0, 1] using 
any sigmoidal function, π(f)=p r o b(y=1|f). This means that the squashed output of GP 
model represents the probability of a data point belonging to one of two types.

The result then, after classification, is that each event is assigned a probability value in the 
range [0, 1] where a score of 0 indicates complete confidence that the event belongs 
to one class and a score of 1 indicates complete confidence that an event 
is of the other class. In practice, the majority of events take intermediate values. We applied a 
decision threshold of 0.5 to the probability scores to determine which class an event 
had been classified as belonging to by GPC.

##Analyses

#Single dataset 10-fold cross validation
The first analysis carried out was 10-fold cross-validation on each dataset. Trials were split into 
10 subgroups, separated in temporal order. Nine of the subgroups were used for: 
(1) training the FBCSP model, (2) selection of the top ranking features using MRelv 
and (3) training the GPC model. For the remaining subgroup, the previously created FBCSP model was 
applied with the same features selected as determined by MRelv and those features 
were then classified by the GPC model. This was the repeated for each of the 10 subgroups 
in a dataset. The purpose of this analysis is to establish the consistency of the EEG responses and the 
classification features derived during processing. A poor average classification 
result would indicate that the responses recorded in a dataset were inconsistent and thus 
possibly unsuitable for deriving a general response.

#Individual healthy dataset models applied to all data
Individual BCI training was carried out using individual healthy datasets. Each dataset, including the 
healthy ones, were then tested using each of the trained BCIs. This resulted in 
a set of one-on-one BCIs, where one subject’s EEG patterns were classified against each of the healthy 
subject’s EEG patterns. Although this is an atypical BCI modality approach, it allows us to see how the 
classification rates vary between subjects.

#Grouped healthy dataset model applied to stroke data
Grouped BCI training was also carried out using all of the healthy datasets. A general BCI was trained 
from the 10 healthy subjects. Each stroke subject dataset was individually 
tested against this general BCI. 
This is a common implementation for communications BCI and so is useful for our investigation. 
Furthermore, these classification results are useful for comparison to the individual BCI results obtained earlier. 

#Leave-one-out cross-validation of healthy datasets
Similarly, we carried out Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation on the healthy datasets. All but one healthy 
dataset were grouped to train a BCI and the excluded healthy datset was tested 
against this model. 
This was then repeated for each healthy dataset. These classification results are useful for comparison 
with the stroke-affected results.

#Early Stroke datasets used to classify corresponding Late Stroke datasets
Individual BCI training was performed for each subject where the early dataset was used to train the BCI 
and then the same subject’s late dataset was then tested on that BCI. 
The comparison of the results from this analysis with the results from training the BCI on healthy EEG 
patterns are important to our investigation.

Another result of interest is the frequency ranges of selected CSP features for each dataset. 
To investigate this, the frequency ranges of the selected CSP features was recorded. 
For each group of Healthy, Early Stroke and Late Stroke, we obtained a histogram of selected frequency 
ranges to see which were favoured and highlight any differences between groups.

anotacao minha: GP foi uma formma de inserir domain konwledge, pra sevir como uma prior, limitando 
os espaco de funcoes possiveis. Na pratica eh uma correlation matrix infinita (kernel)

anotacao minha: parece  que esse eh um problema em que markov assumption eh suave

anotacao minha: achei bem estranho algumas coisas. Tem mt pouco dado, e eles fizeram validacao com 
os dados das mesmas pessoas que tavam no treinamento aparentemente, isso eh zuado.
Alem disso, eles ficam medindo os resultados pela porcentagem na classificacao => tao medindo nivel 
de incerteza no GP. Ser que eh tipo para y = 0.5 eh 0% e ai y = 1 100% e y = 0 100 % ? sepa

anotacao minha: 
y = sucesso nas task = successful engagement of the patient’s motor networks associated with the 
targeted motor task => ai faz sentido esses treinamentos.

Presented in Table 10 are the frequency ranges of the CSP features selected for classifier training 
for each full dataset. 
We also present a corresponding histogram of this data grouped for Healthy, 
Stroke Early and Stroke Late datasets in Figure 4. This histogram suggests that, for healthy EEG, 
the frequency ranges of the CSP features in the 16-20 Hz and 20-24 Hz are most frequently selected. 
Early stroke datasets display some of the healthy datasets’ preference for selection of features 
in the 16-24 Hz range however there is also increased selection of features in the 8-16 Hz range. 
Late stroke datasets appear to shift towards further selection of CSP features in lower frequency 
ranges, with a noticeable increase in selection in the 4-16 Hz range and a relative decrease in 
selection from 16 Hz upwards.

Our first analysis result following 10-fold cross-validation demonstrated that stroke-affected EEG 
is more likely to contain individual trials misclassified than healthy EEG. 
We can speculate on possible reasons why this is so.

For example, it is possible that EEG patterns from a stroke-affected brain are more variable and are 
less stable than those from a healthy brain, 
even if the stroke subject is consistent in their motor task. 
Given that even with healthy subjects engaging successfully in a motor task, flawless classification 
is not always possible then it is not unreasonable 
to expect similar or even worse consistency in stroke-affected brains. 
It is also possible that these mis-classifications are due to the subject mis-performing the task. 
A lapse in concentration on the part of the subject, 
a restless hand movement, an involuntary leg twitch or possibly the 
effects of fatigue could reasonably cause a change in the event-related EEG confounding the efforts 
of the classifiers.

One aspect of recording experimental data with stroke subjects is that minimization of preparation 
time and set up is important to reduce the likelihood of 
a subject becoming fatigued and being unable to complete the task. 
Therefore screening for extraneous muscular artefact based on recording activity of other peripheral 
muscle groups with, for example, electromyography (EMG) 
would add substantially to the instrumentation set up burden as 
well as risk the further discomfort of the stroke patient
This may suggest a link between fatigue and low k-fold cross-correlation result but that the lowest 
scoring dataset was S4L, where no fatigue was reported. 
This illustrates the difficulty of describing the processes which underlie 
the variable EEG features identified.

We can see, for example, in Table 5 that dataset S1E was classified quite well with the healthy 
dataset H3 (97.5%) yet was classified poorly with the healthy dataset H6 (47.5%). 
These cross-dataset EEG classifications are important because the reasons for such varying 
classification successes may be important for advancing rehabilitation 
BCI and our understanding of stroke-affected EEG

# como esperado, a resposta eletro ta ficando mais parecida com a saudavel ao longo do tempo, a 
assim como a acuracia era maior para suadaveis (treinando com tudo) 
ela ficou maior aqui tambem, oq faz sentido
These results suggest that the EEG signal space related to the motor task alters significantly over 
time, in at least some stroke cases. 
The results of accuracy measurements reported here may be useful in characterizing the change
in EEG activity patterns during the recovery phase following stroke and so may potentially be used 
as a measurement of the magnitude of neuroplasticity and compensatory 
changes in the brain’s motor networks.

We suspect that these changes are due to numerous unmeasured factors, such as lesion location, 
patient physical rehabilitation or the patient’s typical use of the stroke-affected hand

Although we have a measure of each subject’s Kapandji score relating to their hand movement capabilities, 
we have not attempted to relate this to a subject’s 
classification accuracies or their change in classification accuracies over time

There are some interesting points of discussion here regarding whether to train a rehabilitation 
BCI on healthy EEG patterns or a subject’s own previously recorded EEG patterns

Firstly, using the healthy EEG datasets, classification results are lower. This may lead to 
frustration for the stroke patient, resulting in non-compliance with 
rehabilitation BCI therapy, even though the EEG patterns the patient must generate 
reflect those typical of healthy cortex. Secondly, training on the early stroke EEG patterns 
could potentially result in a less frustrating experience and better 
engagement from the patient, improving their rehabilitation outcomes. Unfortunately, 
as we have seen in Figure 4, *the early stroke EEG patterns are not characteristic of EEG from 
a healthy brain* reflecting, most likely, the network pathophysiology 
resulting from the stroke. It seems that the advantages and disadvantages of training 
a rehabilitative BCI on either general healthy EEG or a subject’s own earlier recorded EEG will have 
to be considered. We feel that this will be an important question 
to be answered for this field of research.

anotacao minha: *a discussao que fica eh se tipo vc comeca a seguir o desenvolvimento doc erebro 
individual do cara, sem saber aonde ce ta indo, porem obtndo bons resultados; 
ou seguir pela linha tradicional, usando bci com base nos sinais conhecidos que deveriam aparecer,
e que bem sao estudados*

 It appears that there is more left/right asymmetry in the common spatial patterns of healthy datasets 
than stroke-affected datasets. As the differences between the 
two groups is not strong enough to draw any conclusions, we instead feel that these plots suggest that 
stroke-affected CSP 
plots are not dissimilar to healthy CSP plots. Perhaps with a much larger dataset a thorough analysis 
of the differences between stroke-affected and healthy CSP plots 
would be possible

lembrando que: The CSP algorithm produces a set of spatial filters which when used to decompose the EEG signals
Zb,i = WTb * Eb,i . Eb,i e Zb,i sao vetores de vetores (matriz kk), em que cada elemento eh um canal (um vetor tambem no tempo)

The decision to record a session of EEG activity to train a BCI for each subject may also depend on 
a trade-off between improved classification accuracy and any possible 
negative effects of subjecting a stroke patient to an EEG recording session. Possible negative effects 
include anxiety 
(as many stroke patients are elderly and may have apprehension about participating in an EEG recording 
session), loss of therapy time (as time spent training leads to a
 reduction in time spent using the BCI in a therapeutic mode) and fatigue (because a stroke patient 
may become fatigued as 
a result of training, leaving little energy for the therapeutic interaction). In these patients 
where the above factors are prevalent the BCI may have to be trained using 
healthy data. The disadvantage of this approach from a therapy perspective is that the inferior 
performance of the classifier 
may lead to frustration on the part of the patient and a potential rejection of the therapy.

anotacao minha: treinar o bci pra calssificar ainda nao parecece mt util par ao cotrole motor em si, 
tipo envolve saber mt mais coisa do q soh a vontade do cara em fazer 
um mvimento padrao que ee fez no laboratorio
na vdd isso seria pra controle, pra reabilitacoaa cho que basta que ele excere o movimento padrao 
só (ou algum outro tipo de tratamento, por exemplo descarga eletrica nas 
areas que vao sao responsaveis pelo movimento 
(ai entra naquela discussao tb se foca na area ideal ou na que o paciente esta se adaptando)), 
em vez de ele conseguir fazer qq oisa

anotacao minha: a neuroplasticidade vai ser provacada pelo proprio movimento motor realizado 
pela maquina. ai comeca a ter hebbian learning e vai melhorando 
(é a rehabilitacao por robotica; tem as outras descarregamento eletricco no cerebro e tal..)

To understand this somewhat subtle point, it is worth noting that natural recovery in stroke 
is often suboptimal (spasticity, abnormal muscle synergies, etc.) 
and these neurological symptoms can be related to pathophysiological motor and compensatory 
networks that have arisen from the reorganization process.
It is these changes which are most likely reflected in the EEG measurements reported here. 
If a machine learning algorithm consistently adapts to the patient 
to optimize communication with the feedback interface the therapy may well lead to reinforcement of 
these maladaptive changes. 
It may be better that the patient adapts to a classifier which is set up to expect EEG features which 
are more typically associated with engagement of those areas 
of cortex more associated with healthy movement. The catch is that such a classifier may be far too 
frustrating to use and therefore some trade-off between encouraging 
engagement and directing recovery will have to be met for an effective BCI instrument in this use case 
scenario. This issue should be contrasted with the corresponding 
case for communicative BCI which instead adapts to whatever aspects of a subject’s EEG is under volitional 
control requiring less adaptation on the part of the user.


# machine learning algorith choice explanation

In terms of the machine learning options, Gaussian Process classification was our chosen method because, 
as an alternative to the more commonly used method of 
Naive Bayesian classification 
for BCI, GP classification makes no assumptions about the underlying class boundary between regressors, 
including allowing for non-linear class boundaries. 
As we are working with stroke-affected EEG, 
we feel that this is a more robust classification method to use when we are uncertain of the class space. 
At the other extreme, neural networks would provide 
the most detailed class boundary. 
However, GP classification requires optimization of relatively few parameters compared to neural networks. 
We see this as an advantage over both Naive Bayesian 
classification and neural networks. 
We wish to explore this method further as part of our ongoing investigation into its usefulness for 
BCI applications. Finally, GP classification produces more 
information than that reported in this study 
and this could potentially be used for gaining deeper insight into the variability of the features. 
As stated in the description, GPC does not simply return a 
binary class membership but a probability of class membership. 
We applied a decision threshold to this probability but the probabilities themselves are information 
that could potentially be explored in depth. After initial 
investigations, we found that there is a notable difference in the 
variance of class membership probabilities for stroke patients compared to healthy subjects. 
This is an investigation that we are carrying out presently.


# conclusions

Rehabilitative BCIs must take into account the difference in EEG patterns between healthy subjects 
and stroke-affected subjects in order for the system to be 
effective and to aid in recovery. The ideal scenario of a zero-training rehabilitative 
BCI is possible using healthy EEG but the classification accuracy is lower than for healthy subjects 
which could be excessively frustrating for patients. 
Classification accuracy of stroke EEG is improved significantly through subject–specific BCI 
training sessions even 6 months prior however this comes with a cost in terms of loss of rehabilitation 
time and potentially over-adaptation to the user, 
which may be detrimental in terms of optimal recovery. It is clear that a rehabilitative BCI 
must have different technical requirements to those for a communication and control BCI and these 
differences must be considered when developing the
appropriate machine learning scheme for this use case.


-------------------------

title: Post-Stroke Rehabilitation Fact Sheet

url: https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Fact-Sheets/Post-Stroke-Rehabilitation-Fact-Sheet

notes:


Research shows the most important element in any neurorehabilitation program is carefully directed, well-focused, repetitive practice

What factors can affect the outcome of stroke rehabilitation?
- The severity and degree of damage to the brain.
- Age. The degree of recovery is often greater in children and young adults as compared to the elderly
- Level of alertness. Some strokes depress a person’s ability to remain alert and follow instructions 
needed to engage in rehabilitation activities.
- The intensity of the rehabilitation program
- Severity of concurrent medical problems
- The home environment. Additions such as stair rails and grab bars can increase independence and safety at home
- The work environment. Modifications to improve physical safety and modifications of work tasks may make return to work possible.
- Timing of the rehabilitation. Generally, the sooner it begins, the greater are the chances to regain 
lost skills and function and for a successful rehabilitation.

What disabilities can result from a stroke?
The types and degrees of disability that follow a stroke depend upon which area of the brain is damaged. 
Generally, stroke can cause five types of disabilities:

1.Paralysis or problems controlling movement (motor control)
	- Paralysis, loss of voluntary movement, or weakness that usually affects one side of the body, 
	usually the side opposite to the side damaged by the stroke 
	(such as the face, an arm, a leg, or the entire side of the body). Paralysis on one side of the 
	body is called hemiplegia; weakness on one side is called hemiparesis.	
	- Problems swallowing (dysphagia)
	- Loss of control of body movements, including problems with body posture, walking, and balance (ataxia)


2.Sensory disturbances, including pain
	- Losing the ability to feel touch, pain, temperature, or sense how the body is positioned. 
	People who had a stroke also could lose the ability to recognize objects 
	that they are holding or even their own limb.

	- Pain, numbness, a feeling of heaviness in a limb, or odd sensations such as tingling or prickling 
	in a paralyzed or weakened limb (called paresthesia). Numbness or 
	tingling in a limb may continue even after recovering some movement.

	- Loss of bladder and bowel control and loss of mobility to reach a toilet in time. Permanent incontinence after a stroke is uncommon.

	- Chronic pain syndromes can occur as a result of mechanical problems caused by the weakness. 
	Most often, the pain results from lack of movement in a joint that has 
	been immobilized for a prolonged period of time (such as weakness or spasticity and the tendons 
	and ligaments around the joint becoming fixed in one position). This 
	is commonly called a “frozen” joint; treatment involves having a therapist or trained caregiver 
	gently move or flex the joint to prevent painful “freezing” and to allow easy 
	movement after voluntary motor strength returns.

	- More rarely pain can occur due to stroke-induced damage to the nervous system (neuropathic pain), 
	the most common which is called “thalamic pain syndrome” 
	(caused by a stroke to the thalamus, which processes sensory information from the body to the brain).

3. Problems using or understanding language (aphasia)
	- expressive aphasia, in which people lose the ability to speak or write the words they are thinking and to 
	put words together in coherent, grammatically correct sentences.
	
	- receptive aphasia, in which people have difficulty understanding spoken or written language and often have 
	incoherent speech. Although these individuals can form grammatically 
	correct sentences, their utterances are often devoid of meaning.

	- global aphasia, in which people lose nearly all their linguistic abilities; they cannot understand language or use it to convey thought.

4. Problems with thinking and memory
	- anosognosia, an inability to acknowledge the reality of the physical impairments resulting from a stroke
	- neglect, the loss of the ability to respond to objects or sensory stimuli located on the stroke-impaired side. 
	This most commonly affects the left side of people with stroke 
	on the right side of their brain.
	- apraxia, the loss of ability to carry out a learned purposeful movement or to plan the steps involved 
	in a complex task and act on them in the proper sequence. 
	People with apraxia also may have problems following instructions.

5. Emotional disturbances
	After a stroke someone might feel fear, anxiety, frustration, anger, sadness, and a sense of grief 
	over physical and mental losses. Some emotional disturbances and personality 
	changes are caused by the physical effects of brain damage. Clinical depression—a sense of hopelessness 
	that disrupts the ability to function—is commonly experienced by stroke 
	survivors. Post-stroke depression can be treated with antidepressant medications and psychological counseling.


When can a stroke patient begin rehabilitation?
	Rehabilitative therapy typically begins in the acute-care hospital once the condition has stabilized, often within 48 hours after the stroke
	A therapist will help with assisted or self-performed range of motion exercises to strengthen and increase mobility in stroke-impaired limbs


What is the role of technologies in stroke rehabilitation?
	Evidence about technologies for stroke rehabilitation is the fastest growing area of therapeutic research

	Below are examples of how technology is being studied to play a role in the rehabilitation process:

	- Telerehabilitation: a home-based telehealth system designed to improve motor recovery 
	and patient education after stroke.
	- Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation for Post-stroke Motor Recovery: A phase II study 
	(TRANSPORT 2) aims to find out if 
	brain stimulation at different dosage levels combined with an efficacy-proven rehabilitation 
	therapy can improve arm function.
	- The Locomotor Experience Applied Post- Stroke (LEAPS) trial found that people who had 
	a stroke and had physical therapy at home 
	improved their ability to walk just as well as those where were treated with a locomotor 
	training program using treadmill walking with 
	body weight support followed by walking practice. Study investigators also found that 
	patients continued to improve up to one year after stroke.

	- The multi-site I-ACQUIRE trial in infants with perinatal arterial stroke will determine 
the effectiveness of intensive infant rehabilitation to 
	increase upper extremity skills.

	- Sleep-SMART (Sleep for Stroke Management and Recovery Trial) will determine whether 
treatment of sleep-disordered breathing with positive airway 
	pressure after acute ischemic stroke or high-risk transient ischemic attack prevents 
recurrent stroke, and whether treatment of sleep-disordered breathing 
	shortly after acute ischemic stroke improves stroke outcomes at 3 months.
	
-------------------------

title: Utility of EEG measures of brain function in patients with acute stroke

doi: :10.1152/jn.00978.2015.

notes:

Traditional quantitative EEG measures (power in a specific lead, in any frequency
band) showed a modest association with behavioral deficits [NIH
Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score] in bivariate models. However, PLS
models of delta or beta power across whole brain correlated strongly
with NIHSS score (R2  0.85– 0.90) and remained robust when
further analyzed with cross-validation models (R2  0.72– 0.73).
Larger infarct volume was associated with higher delta power, bilaterally; 
the contralesional findings were not attributable to mass effect,
indicating that EEG captures significant information about acute
stroke effects not available from MRI. We conclude that 1) densearray EEG 
data are feasible as a bedside measure of brain function in
patients with acute stroke; 2) high-dimension EEG data are strongly
correlated with acute stroke behavioral deficits and are superior to
traditional single-lead metrics in this regard; and 3) EEG captures
significant information about acute stroke injury not available from
structural brain imaging.

While valid
methods for characterizing neural injury after stroke are well
established and in routine clinical use, ideal methods for
characterizing functional effects of stroke on the brain are still
a research topic, particularly in the setting of acute stroke

Traditional measures of neural function including functional
MRI (Marshall et al. 2009; Saur et al. 2010), PET (Di Piero et
al. 1992), and transcranial magnetic stimulation (Liepert et al.
2000) can provide useful insights into the physiological effects
of a stroke. However, implementation of these techniques in
the acute stroke setting remains challenging, underscoring the
need for additional approaches for measuring brain function
early after stroke and motivating the present study to examine
the precision with which EEG captures effects of acute stroke
on brain function.

EEG is useful for studying brain function safely and rapidly
in complex medical settings and has been known for decades to
provide insights into acute stroke effects (Astrup et al. 1977;
De Weerd et al. 1988; Foreman and Claassen 2012; Macdonell
et al. 1988; Marquardsen and Harvald 1964; Nunez and Srinivasan 2006). EEG metrics in this context, such as increased
slow rhythms and decreased fast rhythms, are directly linked
with neuronal metabolism and so rapidly reflect ischemic
injury (Astrup et al. 1977; Foreman and Claassen 2012). Broad
adoption of EEG into acute stroke clinical practice remains
limited because of a number of factors such as long times
needed to mount traditional AgCl EEG electrodes (Finnigan et
al. 2007) and uncertainty regarding choice of EEG metric
(Finnigan et al. 2007; Sheorajpanday et al. 2009; Xin et al.
2012).

The present study of patients admitted for acute stroke builds
on these findings. *The primary aim of the present study was to
determine how well EEG captures behavioral effects of acute
stroke*. Specific study hypotheses were that 1) dense-array EEG
acquired acutely (hours to days) after stroke onset with a saline
lead cap and analyzed with PLS models of whole brain function is feasible and is significantly related to impairment level
[*NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score*] and 2) these PLS models
capture impairment better than traditional quantitative EEG
metrics (such as spectral power within a specific lead). Two
secondary hypotheses examined were that these EEG-behavior
relationships vary according to extent of injury (i.e., infarct
volume) and that a model combining a measure of neural
function (dense-array EEG) and a measure of neural injury
[acute computerized tomography (CT) or MRI] is more closely
related to impairment level than either measure alone, in line
with prior studies (Burke Quinlan et al. 2015; Finnigan and van
Putten 2013; Kerr et al. 2011; Stinear et al. 2007).

#EEG acquisition and analysis. 
A dense-array surface EEG (256
electrodes, EGI) was used to acquire 3 min of eyes-open, resting-state
brain activity. A HydroCel net applied all 256 electrodes onto the
scalp at the same time. As a result, start-to-finish time for EEG
preparation (including head measurement, net preparation in the saline
conducting solution, net placement, and net adjustments), 3 min of
EEG recording, EEG removal, and cleanup was typically 20 min. Data
were collected with a high-input impedance amplifier at 1,000 Hz
sampling rate, without digital filters.

#EEG preprocessing. 
EEG data were exported to MATLAB 7.8.0
(MathWorks, Natick, MA) for preprocessing and analyses. In line
with previously described methods (Wu et al. 2014, 2015), preprocessing steps 
included applying a second-order 50-Hz low-pass Butterworth filter, mean detrending, and rereferencing to the average
signal across all channels. Continuous EEG data were then binned into
180 sequential, nonoverlapping, 1-s epochs. After a visual inspection
to remove trials contaminated by overt movement and speaking, the
time series was subjected to an Infomax independent component
analysis [EEGLAB (Delorme and Makeig 2004)], from which
components containing characteristic extrabrain artifacts (including eyeblinks, 
eye movements, and cardiac rhythms) were identified and removed (Delorme et al. 2007). 
The remaining components were then transformed back to channel 
space before undergoing a subsequent visual inspection to ensure absence of all
extrabrain artifacts in the remaining data. Across the 24 EEG
recordings, 167.9  20.4 (mean  SD) of the 180 epochs per EEG
exam (88.2%) were retained for subsequent analysis.

#Traditional quantitative EEG metrics. 
Two traditional quantitative
EEG metrics were examined, spectral power and coherence in individual leads. 
Spectral power measures were extracted by submitting
the time series in each channel to a discrete fast Fourier transform and
then normalizing by epoch length. Average absolute power at each
electrode was calculated for a 1–30 Hz frequency band in 1-Hz bins,
then expressed as relative power, i.e., divided by total power across
1–30 Hz at each electrode. Based on prior studies of EEG in acute
brain injury, relative delta (1–3 Hz) power was selected as the primary
measure of spectral power; relative power in theta (4 – 6 Hz), alpha
(7–12 Hz), beta (13–19 Hz), and high beta (20 –30 Hz) bands was also
examined.Since the NIHSS scale is weighted toward motor 
impairments (Lyden et al. 2004), the present study focused on mean
coherence with a seed cluster of seven electrodes overlying ipsilesional 
sensorimotor cortex (SMC); the SMC seed was defined as the
C3 lead, which largely reflects activity from precentral gyrus (Homan
et al. 1987), and its six immediately surrounding electrodes.

#PLS (e brain partial least squares, a regression anlysis) modeling. 
PLS analyses have advantages for analyzing large
data sets such as neuroimaging data, in which multicollinearity across
a large number of predictors can reduce statistical power (Krishnan et
al. 2011). The present study used a previously described implementation of the 
N-way toolbox for MATLAB (Andersson and Bro 2000)
to examine the correlation between behavioral measures and whole
brain EEG measures (Wu et al. 2014, 2015) with PLS regression
analysis. EEG measures examined consisted of the same five power
and five coherence measures examined in the traditional quantitative
EEG analyses above

anotacao minha: parece que ele aplica O PLS (partial least squares) modelling, 
no input obtido pelo espectro de freq
e pela coherence, e nao na serie em si.

# basicamente fazendo festure selection uma regressao linear
For each PLS model, the objective is to maximize representation of
the variance in the dependent measure in as few components of the
independent measure as possible. This is accomplished by optimizing
a least-squares fit of a partial correlation matrix between the independent and 
dependent measures. In the present study, the independent
variables were the EEG measures of brain function and the dependent
variable was NIHSS score. As a preprocessing step, data were mean
centered and then submitted to a direct orthogonal signal correction
(Westerhuis et al. 2011). As with previous studies that use PLS
(Esteban-Diez et al. 2004; Krishnan et al. 2013), this step allows for
more efficient PLS models that are built with fewer components by
removing the single largest component of the independent measure
that is most orthogonal to the behavioral data. In the PLS regression,
a series of models with successively more components were generated
that maximally accounted for variance in NIHSS score. In PLS
analysis, similar to other component-based statistical methods, a
nonlinear increase in percentage of total variance explained is accounted 
for with each additional component. The resultant models
each represent a complex linear regression where each electrode is
associated with a correlation coefficient. The magnitude (absolute
value) and direction (negative or positive) of the correlation coefficient 
represent the degree and direction of correlation between variance in the EEG measure and variance in the dependent measure
(NIHSS score). As previously (Wu et al. 2014, 2015), the fitted PLS
model included as many components as were required to explain 80%
of the variance in the dependent variable. This 80% cutoff was chosen
on the basis of previous experience in our group demonstrating that
there is a significant decrease in added variance accounted for in PLS
models that include greater than two components. Furthermore, it has
been our experience that PLS models that include additional components beyond 
the 80% cutoff never survive leave-one-out and predict
cross-validation

# basicamente fazendo festure creation uma regressao linear
To identify specific clusters of leads where variance in the EEG
measure of interest was most strongly correlated with variance in the
dependent measure, a threshold was predefined and applied to the
correlation coefficients in each PLS model. With a previously detailed
approach (Menzies et al. 2007), regression coefficients were thresholded at |ri
|  0.75  rmax, where ri is the correlation coefficient at the
ith electrode and rmax is the largest |ri
| value across all electrodes.
Clusters were required to have a minimum of two contiguous electrodes exceeding the threshold. 
EEG measures were then averaged
across clusters of leads and regressed against the dependent measure,
using bivariate correlations.

# achoque infartc volume foi outro input q ele usou
Magnetic resonance imaging. As part of the acute stroke imaging
protocol at the UC Irvine Medical Center Stroke Center, all subjects
had diffusion-weighted imaging performed, from which infarct volume was calculated 
with previously described methods (Burke Quinlan et al. 2015).

- imagem da correlacao entre mediadas tradicionais de eeg (features) e o score NIHSS (clinico)
ta no word

- oq eh bonferroni correction?
- eh um tipo de correcao ´ra ajustar o p-vaue (quando faz multiplos testes estatisticos)
- baicamente divide o p value pelo numero de testes -> melhora

-  lembrando que na RL, a hipotese eh que o erro eh normalmente distribuido, 
mas geralmente a gent opera que se as features sao normalmente distribuidos aaba satisfa\endo

# comparing LR model with traitional eeg measures to pls model
Statistical analyses. Parametric methods were used, as measures
were normally distributed or could be transformed to a normal
distribution. Significance was two-tailed, set at P  0.05, and tested
via MATLAB 7.8.0. **At each electrode, traditional quantitative EEG
metrics were evaluated by using linear regression to compare 10
measures (power and coherence with ipsilesional SMC in each of 5
frequency bands), with the dependent measure being NIHSS score,
with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Strength of
these quantitative EEG results was compared to strength of PLS
models by comparing the R2 values.**

#validation
To test the ability of a given model to extrapolate to a test case, a
leave-one-out and predict cross-validation was performed for each
linear regression model and for each fitted PLS model. In this
validation method, data from a single subject are iteratively removed
from the model set. Then, the behavioral data from the removed
subject (test case) are predicted from his/her EEG data with either the
linear regression model or the PLS model generated from the remaining n  1 subjects. 
*The reported validated R2 was calculated from the
sum of errors across all n iterations of the leave-one-out and predict
sequence**. This method has established utility for accurately assessing
a model’s potential to generalize to an independent data set (Huang et
al. 2011).


PLS models are more closely related to acute stroke impairment than traditional quantitative EEG metrics

Injury measures outperformed clinical variables
as correlates of impairment in simple linear regression
analyses. Thus time from stroke onset to EEG acquisition
(P  0.7) and age (P  0.4) did not correlate significantly
with NIHSS score, while an injury measure did (infarct
volume, r  0.41, P  0.046) although infarct volume did
not survive cross-validation

obs: SmC eh  ipsilesional sensorimotor cortex

imagem das correlacoes do PLS model com NIHSS score no word

Combining measures of neural injury and neural function
improves strength of their association with acute stroke
impairment.A model combining an MRI-based measure of
neural injury with an EEG-based measure of neural function
explained acute impairment better than either measure alone.
Structural and functional measures were combined by two
methods.

obs: foi feito 2 pls models (usando todos os eletrodos) para cada ranga de frequencias(beta, delta)
	- um usando power e outro usando coherence

obs: as regressoes lineares pra verificar as medidas tradicioanis de eeg, foram feitas igual o pls sohq uma para cada eletrodo


Second, adding EEG measures of neural function to an
MRI-based measure of neural injury also improved the linear
model. Injury- and **region-specific** functional measures were
combined with a forward stepwise multivariate linear regression approach (0.1 to enter, 0.15 to leave the model)

Second, adding EEG measures of neural function to an
MRI-based measure of neural injury also improved the linear
model. Injury- and region-specific functional measures were
combined with a forward stepwise multivariate linear regression approach (0.1 to enter, 0.15 to leave the model)

#EEG markers of acute stroke impairment vary with extent of
injury
These findings indicate that, in
the most behaviorally salient regions of the delta power EEG
map on both sides of the brain, larger injury was associated
with higher delta power. Results were overall similar for beta
power in the ipsilesional hemisphere

- imagem das correlacoes entre infarct volume e as features (eeg markers) no  word

anotacao minha: ou seja, o tamanho da lesao (que aparecem n exame de imagem) dita uma hierachicalprior no eeg

Additional brain imaging was reviewed to clarify whether
higher contralesional delta power simply reflected mass effect
from the stroke onto the contralesional hemisphere. All brain
CT and MRI images obtained throughout the acute stroke
admission were reviewed for the nine patients with medium
(4 –50 cc) and large (50 cc) strokes, among whom EEG was
acquired 2.3  1.2 days after stroke onset and time between
EEG and any brain imaging averaged 2.8  4.7 days. No mass
effect or edema was present in the contralesional hemisphere in
eight of these subjects, while a single subject showed mild
mass effect (Fig. 2). 
Oq eh esse mass effect? Aaparentemente nao eh por causa disso nao

obs: no  MRI  or CT o cerebro com mass effect (só um nesse estudo)
tinha bolinha branca na regiao

## conclusoes
Evidence suggests that a measure of brain function provides
useful insights in the setting of stroke (Burke Quinlan et al.
2015; Di Piero et al. 1992; Kerr et al. 2011; Marshall et al.
2009; Saur et al. 2010); however, candidate techniques such as
functional MRI and PET are challenging to implement in the
acute care setting for reasons such as accessibility and cost.
EEG has established value for measuring altered brain function
in the acute stroke setting (Astrup et al. 1977; De Weerd et al.
1988; Foreman and Claassen 2012; Macdonell et al. 1988;
Marquardsen and Harvald 1964; Nunez and Srinivasan 2006)
and overcomes many of these challenges but has not been
widely adopted. Building on advances in EEG hardware, recording electrodes, 
and software methods, the present study
found that dense-array EEG analyzed with PLS modeling was
a powerful correlate of behavioral status, performing better
than traditional quantitative EEG metrics or measures of brain
injury in the present cohort of 24 patients admitted for acute
ischemic stroke. In addition, infarct volume was associated
with differences in EEG findings, including the finding that
larger infarct volume was associated with higher contralesional
delta power, a result that indicates that EEG captures significant information 
regarding acute stroke effects not available
from MRI. Acquisition of dense-array EEG in acutely ill
patients was feasible in wide-ranging clinical settings including
the ER and ICU. Together these findings suggest that dense 
array EEG provides an accessible measure of brain function
that is superior to traditional single-lead metrics, and is complementary to 
injury measures, for understanding behavioral
effects of acute brain injury such as stroke

Previous studies of patients with acute stroke have found
that EEG changes correlate with behavioral status (Finnigan et
al. 2007; Sheorajpanday et al. 2009) and, compared with
neuroimaging alone, provide an improved understanding of
clinical course (Finnigan and van Putten 2013). The present
study builds upon these efforts, addressing issues that have
limited broad adoption of EEG in the acute stroke setting. First,
use of a single saline net, rather than the traditional application
of 20 separate electrodes with paste, shortens the time to begin
acquiring EEG signals (Tucker 1993). Second, use of densearray (256 electrodes) 
EEG increases spatial resolution compared with 10-20 lead montages (Luu et al. 2001; Petrov et al.
2014). Third, use of PLS analyses maximizes statistical power
by maintaining dimensionality and spatial resolution of the
data (Wu et al. 2014, 2015). As such, several PLS models were
very strongly related to acute behavioral deficits (Table 2); for
example, the PLS model of delta power was robust (R2  0.72
in the leave-one-out model validation). In contrast, across the
10 traditional quantitative EEG measures examined,

**This is consistent with prior
studies that found that a multimodal approach incorporating
both neural function and neural injury explained poststroke
behavior better than either measure alone (Burke Quinlan et al.
2015; Kerr et al. 2011)**These results indicate that both neural function and neural
injury are related to impairment early after stroke and confirm
that an approach combining the two is significantly better than
either measure alone for understanding behavior

These differences in the weighting of EEG map
topography could potentially identify therapeutic targets or
serve as biomarkers in a pathophysiologically specific manner.

However, this concern
is mitigated in part by use of dense-array (256 electrodes) EEG
(Luu et al. 2001; Petrov et al. 2014) and by the fact that for
electrodes C3 and C4 a particularly strong association exists
between underlying cortical brain function and the signals
measured at the scalp (Homan et al. 1987).

*The specific hardware and
software choices employed in the present study are not likely
ideal solutions for widespread application of the present results, and so one potential future direction for additional
studies is to capture the present results with methods that can
be widely adopted.*


-------------------------


title:  EEG-Based Brain–Computer
Interfaces for Communication and
Rehabilitation of People with Motor
Impairment: A Novel Approach of the
21st Century

doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.000014

notes:

#WHY BRAIN–COMPUTER INTERFACES?

In addition, current technological assistive solutions using eye
trackers enable people with motor disabilities to communicate
and control devices at home

Nevertheless, the main
problem of using eye trackers as an assistive technology (AT),
is the so-called “Midas touch problem” (Majaranta and Räihä,
2002). In essence, the direction of gaze in many cases does not
coincide with the focus of attention and consequently the final
selections are different from the users’ intention (Majaranta and
Räihä, 2002; Karat and Vanderdonckt, 2009; Nicolas-Alonso and
Gomez-Gil, 2012; Pasqualotto et al., 2015; Ordikhani-Seyedlar
et al., 2016)

 Other systems (e.g., “Eye-Go”) utilize eye-tracking
methods for wheelchair maneuvering (Gajwani and Chhabria,
2010). Nevertheless, there are still several limitations regarding
both the ability to alter or change seating position and the
capacity of maneuvering the wheelchair to a specific direction by
using eye movement, which poses requirements for both system
software and for eye-tracking technology

Besides gaze-based interaction, there are also speech-based
interfaces like the Dragon Dictate Speech (DDS) recognition
system (Zimmer et al., 1991). The system learns a user’s
vocabulary and mode of speaking by analyzing language and
responds to natural language instead of limited phrases and
words. However, it needs many adaptations, such as microphone
positioning, and training, so it is not useful for people at
late stages of NMD who have totally lost their ability to
speak. Furthermore, speech-driven interfaces are limited by the
number of supported languages. Although English is extensively
supported, this is not the case for less popular languages (e.g.,
Greek)

Other solutions utilize robotic assistive devices for motor
disabled people (Corke, 2007). The usability of such devices is
still doubtful due to the necessity of residual motor ability for
their operation (e.g., limb, head and/or eye movements, speech
etc.) (Cincotti et al., 2008b). For people in extreme pathological
conditions (e.g., those who are in CLIS without any remaining
muscle control), the use of such systems may not be possible

Additionally, recent studies have underlined the importance of
BCI systems in rehabilitation and restoration of motor function.
For instance, the Personalized Self-Managed rehabilitation
System (PSMrS), is a prototype system integrated with an insole
sensor technology (“intelligent shoe”) (Mawson et al., 2016).
It has been developed to enable people who survived stroke
to self-manage their rehabilitation by encouraging achievement
of personal and adaptive functional goals and performance of
specific motor activities within those goals. However, people who
participated in this study and used this technology reported a
number of limitations such as the lack of feedback and lack
of motivation of the user (Mawson et al., 2016).


#obs: bci
According to Boris Reuderink, Machine Learning Consultant at Cortext, “One of the bigger problems in brain-computer 
interfaces is that the brain signals are weak and very variable. This is why it is difficult to train a classifier, and use 
it the next day, let alone use it on a different subject.” (source)

According to Amit Ray, Author of Compassionate Artificial Intelligence, “The most sophisticated BCIs are “bi-directional” BCIs 
(BBCIs), which can both record from and stimulate the nervous system.

However, one of the biggest issues in BCI reseach is the non-stationarity of brain signals. This issue makes it difficult for a classifier to 
find realiable patterns in the signals, resulting in bad classifying performances.


#EEG-BCI Neurophysiological Input
4 types:
	- SCPs (Slow Cortical Potential)
	- SMR (Sensorimotor Rhythms)
	- P300 event related potentials
	- Steady State Visual Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs)

SCPs are very slow shifts in the EEG near to 0 Hz, typically generated in an event-related design for several seconds.
In normal brain function, negative SCPs accompany preparatory
depolarization of the underlying cortical network, whereas
positive SCPs are thought to reflect cortical disaffiliation or
inhibition. With substantial training, control of SCPs to produce
positive or negative voltage shifts can be learnt and used for basic
word processing and other tasks (Leeb et al., 2015). However,
SCP-BCI systems need long training periods, professional
attention and continuous technical support, while not all patients
can gain full control of their SCPs.

Steady State Visual Evoked Potentials are evoked by an
oscillating stimulus modulated at a fixed frequency and occur
as an increase in EEG activity at the stimulation frequency
(Valbuena et al., 2010). The typical SSVEP-based BCI application
utilizes multiple visual flashing stimuli, such as digits or letters
on a screen, while the user looks at one of the symbols
and focuses his attention on it (Lesenfants et al., 2014).
When the users concentrate their attention on one of the
stimuli, the stimulus evokes an increased SSVEP response at
the corresponding frequency over the occipital area of the
brain. Thus, the user has to keep eye fixation. This type of
BCI depends on attentional capacity and vision to be intact,
and both are often compromised in patients with advanced
and severe neurological disease (Chaudhary et al., 2016).
Therefore, SSVEPs are not suitable for patients in advanced
stages of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS-LIS) or with
uncontrollable eye movements (Nicolas-Alonso and GomezGil, 2012). A number of SSVEP-based BCI systems have been
developed and applied to operating a prosthesis (Muller-Putz
and Pfurtscheller, 2008) or controlling an avatar in a virtual
reality environment (Faller et al., 2010) by healthy individuals

#EEG-BASED BCI SYSTEMS FOR
PEOPLE WITH MOTOR-IMPAIRMENT
 #Communication and Control
  #BCIs Using Sensorimotor Rhythm (SMR)
   #Virtual environments
    	Another study explored how a tetraplegic subject, sitting in
	a wheelchair, could control his movements in a VE with a
	self-paced (asynchronous) BCI system (Leeb et al., 2007). The
	usage of the VE framework with talking avatars ensured that
	the experiment is novel and engaging and contains enough
	distractions as it would be in a real street environment. After four
	runs, the subject was able to reach accuracy of 100%. This work
	was the first study which included avatars and VE and introduced
	new ways of interaction and control of applications for people
	with motor impairment in a VE by using MI. The fact that after
	only four runs, the subject reached a successful performance of
	100% shows that motivation induced by responses of the avatars
	and more realistic conditions enables the participant to achieve
	better performance (Leeb et al., 2007).


#Rehabilitation and Training Using
EEG-Based BCI
In this vein, it is suggested that there are two ways for
paralyzed people to regain motor abilities by using BCI systems:
(i) train patients to produce more reliable motor brain signals,
and (ii) train patients to activate a device that assists movement
by improving the motor function (Remsik et al., 2016). Even
though people with acquired motor impairment often exhibit
damaged cortex or disrupted motor connection integrity, (EEG)-
based BCI methods are still capable of identifying meaningful
improvement and gradual change. By relying on the capacity
of residual motor neurons to trigger and facilitate appliance
control, BCIs help to train persisting cortical connections to
execute motor output of the motor-impaired limb (e.g., hand). In
general, EEG-BCI has implications for the potential of recovery
while it can be considered as an assistive solution to traditional
physiotherapeutic approaches. The combined approach of BCI
systems together with traditional physiotherapy appears to be
very effective. A recent systematic review has demonstrated the
benefits and the clinical efficacy of BCI systems in motor recovery
of post-stroke patients during stroke rehabilitation process, in
combination with traditional physiotherapy and robotic assistive
orthotic devices (Remsik et al., 2016).

In another work, a tetraplegic participant gained control of a
hand orthosis in order to improve his functionality of residual
muscle activity and restore “hand grasp function” of the upper
limb. This was achieved by regulating his SMR through motor
imaging of his foot movement (Pfurtscheller et al., 2000). More
specifically, MI of the hand movements (right or left) yielded
generally moderate classification rates, whereas in the case of
MI of foot movement, the classification performance increased
gradually and significantly over time. Following the training
procedure the participant was capable for a successful operation
of the orthosis by closing the hand orthosis while imaging
both-feet-movement and by opening the orthosis by imaging
right-hand-movement, nearly error-free with CA close to 100%.
This was achieved mainly by the ability to induce voluntarily
specific beta oscillations close to the foot area. Since a stable
performance of above 90% correct responses was reached, the
patient started to practically use the orthosis to lift light-weighted
objects.

Finally, another study demonstrated the potential application
of a MI task as a mechanism for stroke rehabilitation. They
classified the participants into three sub-groups based on the
different lesion locations in order to perform three different
motor tasks (MI, passive motion, and active motion). The
Motor Tasks included active movements, where grasping and
supination movements with the affected hand were performed
and passive movements, where a robotic device performed the
movement. The MI was executed by imaging a movement, but
the participants did not perform the physical movement. They
found different β band EEG patterns in each patient group while
two groups showed positive laterality coefficient (LC) values (LC
of the ERD/ERS power of stroke patients is affected by brain
damage) in the active and MI tasks. In these groups, the motor
cortex was not directly damaged, therefore, a level of brain
activation similar to that in able-bodied group was observed (Park
et al., 2016). **Thus, motor rehabilitation period differed depending
on lesion location and these changes produced different patterns
of neural activation in patients with chronic stroke on different
lesion locations.**

#Discussion
Moreover, many studies have successfully addressed the
problem of user’s training duration, which has been essentially
decreased and has led to additional broad BCI systems deployed
in the everyday routine of people with motor impairment, such as
word processing, use of browsers, sending and reading of emails
(Zickler et al., 2011), control of devices, such as wheelchair and
domestic appliances.

Moreover, SMR-based games (Kauhanen et al., 2007; Bai et al.,
2008) indicated that people with motor impairment show reliable
performance and a successful BCI operation. In Kauhanen et al.
(2007) three out of six subjects learned to control a BCI after
training, where a great advantage was that participants received
feedback and could change their strategy in response to the
feedback. In Bai et al. (2008) both patients were able to use
the proposed SMR-BCI game system with high performance as
well. Both studies are highlighting the adaptability of the systems
and the general acceptance of game applications by people
with motor impairment. However, 
**in SMR BCI applications a
main disadvantage is that although ERD/ERS is observed in the
majority of participants, some subjects (even able-bodied) may
have no detectable ERD/ERS components (on the contrary P300
component is always observed)**. 

anotacao minha: P300 sempre esta presente, SMR na maioria

Initially, these BCI approaches
for entertainment were typically not at high priority in the field of
BCI research due to the fact that BCI research has mainly focused
on applications to address communication and independency
through assistive technological ways (i.e., spelling devices, control
of external devices). Nevertheless, game oriented solutions seem
to be really promising since they use additional assistive tools
while enhancing participant’s motivation.

. Also, except for
few cases (Vansteensel et al., 2016), the majority of BCI systems
and applications are mainly used in a research environment
(research laboratory etc.) and cannot be successfully utilized in
patients homes for continuous and everyday use, as they need
adaptation and fixation during the operation.

adaptation and fixation during the operation.
**P300 exhibits higher ITRs and does not need much training** but
is greatly affected by the level of severity of the disease.
Nevertheless, many studies have also shown that even patients in
the LIS can use a P300 BCI for long term periods (Sellers et al.,
2010; Holz et al., 2015). However, in terms of ITR, able-bodied
group reached higher maximum bit rates than disabled subjects
in almost all studies of P300-BCI (Escolano et al., 2010; Mugler
et al., 2010; Mauro et al., 2011; Vaughan et al., 2011; Nam et al.,
2012; Pires et al., 2012). Moreover, in some studies the patients
did not even complete the experimental process (Mauro et al.,
2011). In addition, in most cases the most severely paralyzed
participants seem not to be able to operate successfully the EEG
based BCI system (Pires et al., 2012; Pasqualotto et al., 2015).
These results indicate that (i) P300 may be affected by level
of severity, (ii) participants have worse performance during the
sessions due to a “habitual effect” (Ravden and Polich, 1998, 1999;
Kececi et al., 2006).
The reviewed articles largely focused on individuals with
adult-onset disabilities. It is unclear if the findings of these studies
could be generalized to individuals with congenital disabilities,
who often have never experienced any terms of communication
or motion. For example, to the best of our knowledge, BCI
systems which use SMR for system operation rely on MI of
upper and lower limbs and have not been tested with individuals
who never experienced voluntary control of their movements

Thus, since a classifier comparison has never been performed
on participants, it remains an open question what might be the
best classifier in each case. This is definitely a critical inquiry
since the brain activation and responses from people with motor
impairment and able-bodied participants might be different

**Also as EEG signals
reflect the dynamics of the interaction between the user and the
BCI systems, error-related potentials (Chavarriaga et al., 2014)
may be a useful solution as an auto-correction strategy.**

Moreover, a development of a BCI technology that does
not replace but complement existing therapies is a novel and
promising field. Studies in stroke patients have shown that, with
a motor relearning intervention, EEG features change in parallel
with improvement in motor function and that sensorimotor
rehabilitation using BCI training and MI may improve motor
function after central nervous system injury. Taking into account
all the above mentioned pieces of evidence, there is a strong
assumption that BCIs can eventually promote the independence
through novel communication techniques and promote motor
rehabilitation of patients with NMD.


#Conclusion and future perspectives
Moreover to address the issue of extensive
training for self-regulation of SMR, more enjoyable solutions
such as Virtual Reality or Painting (Holz et al., 2015) could
be used. These approaches re-enable patients to be creatively
active and consequently promote feelings of happiness, selfesteem and well-being, 
and promote better QoL. Also, as the goal
of future studies should be the demonstration of a long-term
beneficial impact of BCI technology on functional recovery and
motor rehabilitation, extensive randomized controlled trials are
required.

The development of novel BCIs raises new hopes for the
motor rehabilitation of people with motor impairment (Daly
and Wolpaw, 2008). Therefore, combination of MI to improve
efficacy of physiotherapy in stroke rehabilitation will be a
promising solution. However, the majority of current published
works are basically proof of concept studies with no clinical based
evidence of daily use by people with motor impairment. Thus, the
acceptability and usability of future developed EEG-BCI systems
might be two important issues depending on the size, complexity
of the EEG device and successful operation that should be taken
into consideration in the future. Nevertheless, BCI systems have
already demonstrated their efficacy and reliability. In sum, as was
reported in Wolpaw et al. (2002): “non-muscular communication
and control is no longer merely speculation while at the same
time, the reality does not yet match the fantasy.”

------------------------

title: (referenced in the above paper) A Personalized Self-Management Rehabilitation 
System for Stroke Survivors: A Quantitative Gait Analysis Using a Smart Insole

doi: 10.2196/rehab.5449.

notes:

Background: In the United Kingdom, stroke is the single largest cause of 
adult disability and results in a cost to the economy of £8.9 billion per annum. 
Service needs are currently not being met; therefore, initiatives that focus on 
patient-centered care that promote long-term self-management for chronic conditions 
should be at the forefront of service redesign. The use of innovative technologies and 
the ability to apply these effectively to promote behavior change are paramount in meeting 
the current challenges.

Objective: Our objective was to gain a deeper insight into the impact of innovative 
technologies in support of home-based, self-managed rehabilitation for stroke survivors. 
An intervention of daily walks can assist with improving lower limb motor function, 
and this can be measured by using technology. This paper focuses on assessing the 
usage of self-management technologies on poststroke survivors while undergoing 
rehabilitation at home.

Methods: A realist evaluation of a personalized self-management rehabilitation 
system was undertaken in the homes of stroke survivors (N=5) over a period of 
approximately two months. Context, mechanisms, and outcomes were developed and 
explored using theories relating to motor recovery. Participants were encouraged 
to self-manage their daily walking activity; this was achieved through goal setting 
and motivational feedback. Gait data were collected and analyzed to produce metrics 
such as speed, heel strikes, and symmetry. This was achieved using a "smart insole" 
to facilitate measurement of walking activities in a free-living, nonrestrictive environment.

Results: Initial findings indicated that 4 out of 5 participants performed better 
during the second half of the evaluation. Performance increase was evident through 
improved heel strikes on participants' affected limb. Additionally, increase in performance 
in relation to speed was also evident for all 5 participants. A common strategy emerged across 
all but one participant as symmetry performance was sacrificed in favor of improved heel strikes. 
This paper evaluates compliance and intensity of use.

Conclusion: Our findings suggested that 4 out of the 5 participants improved their 
ability to heel strike on their affected limb. All participants showed improvements in 
their speed of gait measured in steps per minute with an average increase of 9.8% during 
the rehabilitation program. Performance in relation to symmetry showed an 8.5% average decline 
across participants, although 1 participant improved by 4%. Context, mechanism, and outcomes indicated 
that dual motor learning and compensatory strategies were deployed by the participants.

#solution: BCI
Brain–computer interface systems promise to offer a
unique and multimodal solution for both communication and
rehabilitative therapy that will overcome the shortfalls of the
abovementioned approaches (Chaudhary et al., 2016). In general,
BCI is a computer-based system which translates brain signals
into commands that are passed onto an external application or
appliance so as to facilitate user’s intention. As a result people
can communicate with the environment, although they do
not use their peripheral nervous system and muscles (Wolpaw
et al., 2000). The idea of operating an external device with
one’s thoughts is a highly promising option for people whose
functions such as speech or motion are impaired. Many clinical
studies on BCI research field have highlighted not only the
potential utility and integration of these innovative technological
approaches into life of people with motor impairment, but also
the positive impact occurring by translating scientific knowledge
and experimental design into clinical benefits by enabling
a novel real-time communication between the user and the
external world (Bowsher et al., 2016). In terms of utility, BCI
technology gives the opportunity to individuals who are not
able to speak and/or use their limbs not only to communicate
and interact with others, but also to operate such appliances as
domestic devices, computers, speech synthesizers and assistive
deployments, or even control neural prosthetics for walking
and manipulating objects (Wolpaw et al., 2002); even in CLIS
(Chaudhary et al., 2017). 

**Nevertheless, many BCI systems have
also some drawbacks, since users might need long periods of
training to learn to control their brain rhythms (Pires et al.,
2012) or have problems to conveniently operate the BCI system
such as problems with switching it off and on (“Midas touch”
problem) (Nicolas-Alonso and Gomez-Gil, 2012).**

obs: referencia citada  (Pires et al.,2012)
#Discussion
The results show that people can learn to use scalp-recorded
EEG rhythms to control rapid and accurate movement of a
cursor in two dimensions. Control develops gradually over
training sessions as the user gradually acquires better EEG
control and as the BCI system gradually focuses on those rhythm
amplitudes that the user is best able to control. Thus, the
two-dimensional movement control demonstrated in this study is
a skill that the user and the system gradually master together. As
cursor control improves, the motor imagery users employ early
in training tends to become less important and performance
becomes more automatic.
A user’s previous one-dimensional experience, which as noted
above was extensive for user A, limited for user B, absent for user
C, and in the distant past for user D, appeared to have little
impact on two-dimensional performance (Table 1 and Fig. 2).
On the other hand, users A and D, who had spinal cord injuries,
achieved substantially better performance than users B and C,
who were not disabled. If future studies show this to be a
consistent finding, it could reflect motivational differences
andor sensorimotor cortex plasticity associated with spinal cord
injury (30).

Nevertheless,
BCI systems could improve the quality of life (QoL) of people
with motor impairment as a result of social inclusion (Sellers
et al., 2010; Holz et al., 2015), even in CLIS (Liu et al., 2011).
Indeed, communication ability is of high priority in improving
QoL of people with motor impairments


#obs: Eye-gaze interfaces: 
intentional fixation or casual gaze?
It’s a few years since eye movement-based user interfaces have found their application in healthcare, 
science, and other kinds of industry. In 1995, R. J.K. Jacob in Advanced interface design and virtual 
environments raise the problem in the development of eye-gazed based interfaces, when it comes to telling 
an intentional fixation of the interface element for activating a function from an accidental one that should produce no effect.
The solution to avoid the Midas Touch effect, here, is to use the gaze as a pointing device to select an 
interface element and trigger the command by an explicit movement of the eye or maybe a few blinks. 
A less uncomfortable from a user perspective solution is to take advantage of dwell-time based input and 
focal fixation: the command is activated if the user has been gazing a well-defined element of the interface
 a little bit longer than a causal fixation lasts.


obs: MI eh motor imaging

#Rehabilitation and Training Using
EEG-Based BCI
# MI-based BCI
In another work, a tetraplegic participant gained control of a
hand orthosis in order to improve his functionality of residual
muscle activity and restore “hand grasp function” of the upper
limb. This was achieved by regulating his SMR through motor
imaging of his foot movement (Pfurtscheller et al., 2000). More
specifically, MI of the hand movements (right or left) yielded
generally moderate classification rates, whereas in the case of
MI of foot movement, the classification performance increased
gradually and significantly over time. Following the training
procedure the participant was capable for a successful operation
of the orthosis by closing the hand orthosis while imaging
both-feet-movement and by opening the orthosis by imaging
right-hand-movement, nearly error-free with CA close to 100%.
This was achieved mainly by the ability to induce voluntarily
specific beta oscillations close to the foot area. 

Lower extremity motor impairments and disturbed gait have a far greater impact on stroke
patients’ daily lives [90]. Hence, following the success in upper limb rehabilitation, a few studies have
explored the applicability of BCI for lower limb motor
function restoration. In a controlled trial, Chung et al
have reported significant clinical improvements in
the timed up and go test (TUG), cadence, and step
length following a BCI-FES intervention for five sessions [14]. More importantly, in this study, the control group which received FES for the same duration
did not result in significant improvements. Another
study that implemented a BCI-based neurofeedback
also reported similar conclusions wherein the experimental group showed significant improvements in
gait velocity, cadence, stance phase index, forefoot
and hindfoot weight whereas only gait velocity was
improved in the control group which received a random neurofeedback [91]. Similarly, Tang et al have
reported significant improvements in the TUG following MI-BCI rehabilitation with the visual feedback [92]. All these initial studies indicate promising
improvements in the lower limb functions following BCI-based rehabilitation [14, 44, 77, 91–93] and


-------------------------

title: (explaning gait) Gait training after stroke

doi: https://www.physio-pedia.com/Gait_Training_in_Stroke

notes:

Gait training after stroke
8 phases of gait cycle.png
Hemiplegia is one of the most common impairments after stroke and contributes significantly 
to reduce gait performance. Although the majority of stroke patients achieve an independent gait, 
many do not reach a walking level that enable them to perform all their daily activities. 
Gait recovery is a major objective in the rehabilitation program for stroke patients. 
Restoring functions after stroke is a complex process involving spontaneous recovery and 
the effects of therapeutic interventions.

The primary goals of people with stroke include being able to walk independently and to 
manage to perform daily activities. Consistently, rehabilitation programs for stroke patients 
mainly focus on gait training, at least for sub-acute patients.

Several general principles underpin the process of stroke rehabilitation.

Good rehabilitation outcome seems to be strongly associated with high degree of motivation 
and engagement of the patient and his/her family.
Setting goals according to specific rehabilitation aims of an individual might improve the outcomes.
In addition, cognitive function is importantly related to successful rehabilitation. 
Attention is a key factor for rehabilitation in stroke survivors as poorer attention 
performances are associated with a more negative impact of stroke disability on daily functioning[1]

-------------------------
title: Intro to EEG & BCI - SURGE Neuro-Hackathon 2019

url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QjJjUp4zWmc

notes:

 - uma medida de eeg eh muito noisy, mas se vc faz uma media de um monte ai vc se aproxima do que realmente eh sinal
 - eh proporcional a raiz  quadrada do numero de trails pois: sigma_xbarra = sigma/root(n)

 - responses for each person very similar across different dates
 - responses are very ddifferent across different people

 - p3 occurs after a stimulus, bigger when the simulus accours infrequently
	
 - visual evoked potentials (VEP) is reposnse to visual stimulus

 - suppose there werer lots of objects appearing different frequencies -> the strongest frequency in the frequency spectrum 
(power spectrum) is the one you were paying attention to

 - frequencies ranges: delta -> slepp and low levels of consciousness; theta -> certain types of cognitive activity and attention; 
 alpha/mu -> brain idle mode, imagining movements or actually executing movements increses amplitude (sensorymotor cortex);
 beta ->  imagining movements or actually executing movements increses amplitude (sensorymotor cortex);
 gama -> memory andother processes in cognition

-------------------------

title: Deep learning guided stroke management: a review
of clinical applications

url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/DL%20for%20stroke%20management%20-%20clinical%20aplications.pdf

notes:

important: nothing with eeg in this article, talks about working with immages

Stroke is a leading cause of long-term disability, and
outcome is directly related to timely intervention. Not
all patients benefit from rapid intervention, however.
Thus a significant amount of attention has been paid
to using neuroimaging to assess potential benefit
by identifying areas of ischemia that have not yet
experienced cellular death. The perfusion–diffusion
mismatch, is used as a simple metric for potential
benefit with timely intervention, yet penumbral patterns
provide an inaccurate predictor of clinical outcome.
Machine learning research in the form of deep learning
(artificial intelligence) techniques using deep neural
networks (DNNs) excel at working with complex inputs.
The key areas where deep learning may be imminently
**applied to stroke management are image segmentation,
automated featurization (radiomics), and multimodal
prognostication**. The application of convolutional neural
networks, the family of DNN architectures designed to
work with images, **to stroke imaging data** is a perfect
match between a mature deep learning technique
and a data type that is naturally suited to benefit from
deep learning’s strengths. These powerful tools have
opened up exciting opportunities for data-driven stroke
management for acute intervention and for guiding
prognosis. Deep learning techniques are useful for the
speed and power of results they can deliver and will
become an increasingly standard tool in the modern
stroke specialist’s arsenal for delivering personalized
medicine to patients with ischemic stroke.

Stroke is responsible for 130000 deaths annually
(1 in 20 deaths). It is a leading cause of long-term
disability, accounting for annual costs of between
$34 and $74billion in healthcare services and in lost
productivity.1
 Stroke differs from other leading
causes of mortality and morbidity (heart failure,
cancer) in that the outcome is directly related to
timely intervention.2

Several studies have shown that some patients may
benefit from thrombolysis and/or recanalization
if carried out within 3–4.5hours after a stroke.2
Not all patients benefit from rapid intervention,
however, and determining which patients would
benefit is one of the major challenges for interventional stroke management

Without clear clinical
features for guidance or a solid biological rationale
for which neurons may regain functional capacity
after ischemic injury, a **significant amount of attention 
has been paid to using neuroimaging to assess
potential benefit by identifying areas of ischemia
that have not yet experienced cellular death**.8

**Brain tissue downstream of the blockage can
be categorized into three regions: ischemic core,
penumbra, and benign oligemia.9
 The region
of at-risk neuronal tissue, termed the ischemic
penumbra, is characterized by decreased arterial
perfusion on CT perfusion (CTP) imaging, a sign
of ischemia, with an absence of diffusion restriction
on MRI, a sign of cellular death**

The difference
between these two signals, the perfusion–diffusion
mismatch, is used as a simple metric for potential
benefit with timely intervention.

Despite mechanistic rationale of this metric for identifying potentially 
salvageable brain, in practice, penumbral
patterns provide an inaccurate predictor of clinical
outcome.11 Although more advanced statistical
methods have been attempted, none of then have
proved to be much better than simple perfusion–
diffusion mismatch

#Current stroke analytics

CT and MRI are the backbone of stroke analytics
for both research and clinical decision support. The
use of imaging to guide stroke therapy occurs at
multiple points in care to guide diagnostic, medical,
and interventional decision-making. Recently,
multiple randomized control trials reporting on
mechanical thrombectomy were published: MR
CLEAN, ESCAPE, Extend-IA, SWIFT-PRIME,
REVASCAT, THRACE, and THERAPY.16–22
Contrary to the results of earlier studies, these
recent trials consistently showed superior clinical outcomes, 
with use of neuroimaging criteria
for patient selection being a key component of
these trials

Unlike the Alberta Stroke Programme Early CT
Score (ASPECTS) on non-contrast CT (NCCT),
CTP provides an objective quantitative assessment of
the ischemic core and penumbral tissue.24–26 Studies
have shown that CTP is more sensitive than NCCT
for identifying ischemic core,27 and can achieve
close approximation to diffusion-weighted imaging,
which is the gold standard.25 Although an estimate
of the tissue at risk of ischemia can be made based
on the site of vessel occlusion, accurate assessment
is limited by the significant anatomical variability
in collaterals, particularly in patients with a large
ischemic core.2

In multiple studies, a time to
maximum (Tmax) >6 s has been validated as a good 
approximation of tissue at risk.30–32 DEFUSE 2 and EXTEND-IA
both use Tmax with a threshold to delineate ischemic penumbra
from hypoperfused tissue.17 33 **In both of these studies, the
RAPID software program from Stanford was used for automated
CTP preprocessing before manual analysis**.1

Often cited concerns about neuroimaging-guided management include the 
additional time needed to acquire and process
the images, and the variations in processing methodology and
interpretation. EXTEND-IA and SWIFT-PRIME trials used
fully automated software, which allowed standardization
of processing methodology, perfusion map appearance, and
objective segmentation of lesion volumes across a range of
hardware platforms in multiple centers.17 18 Importantly, these
trials demonstrate the feasibility of standardizing automated
processing of CTP in the time-critical clinical environment

The time taken for acquisition of the CTP image itself is typically 60–90s. 
Subsequent image reconstruction and processing
time can be shortened to <5min when automated software is
used. Automated processing and production of perfusion maps
removes the need for trained personnel and facilitates rapid
interpretation by the physician. **However, motion correction,
partial recanalization into already infarcted tissue, refinement of
core and penumbral selection criteria are all outstanding challenges 
that would benefit from further research**

It is worth
noting that one of the few major studies to directly analyze the
use of imaging analytics to guide stroke management using CTP,
performed by Kidwell et al, had negative results.34 This should
be interpreted with caution however, for like many interventional studies 
before MR CLEAN, modern interventional tools
and techniques were not a routine component of the trial. As
further evidence on this point, the EXTEND-IA trial demonstrated a clear 
benefit of stent retriever intervention for anterior
circulation strokes demonstrating an ischemic penumbra.17

Before 2015, most trials of mechanical thromboembolectomy
devices did not yield better treatment outcomes than standard
tPA therapy. In contrast the five major trials published in 2015
all had superior results, and methodologically differed from
previous studies by introducing rigorous neuroimaging-based
patient selection.

More studies continue to confirm the
important correlation between neuroimaging data and predicting
treatment outcomes. Dzialowski et al, in their study with more
than 800 patients from the European–Australian Acute Stoke

Study II study, found that the ASPECTS on NCCT is strongly
associated with clinical outcomes. In addition, they reported
that patients with a low ASPECTS have a significantly increased
risk of thrombolytic-related parenchymal hemorrhage.

In one study
published in 2016, Tsogkas et al reported on 65 patients who
received mechanical thrombectomy, and compared the predictive value 
of CBV-ASPECT and CT angiography-ASPECT. They
found that CBV-ASPECT could predict futile reperfusion in 96%
of cases. CBV-ASPECT was also better at predicting favourable
outcomes

In another study Haussen et al investigated the
ASPECTS and CTP ischemic core volumetric measurements
from the RAPID automated software in over 300 patients treated
for middle cerebral artery or internal carotid artery occlusions.
Although the study reported only a modest correlation between
ASPECTS or CTP ischemic core and final infarct volume,
ASPECTS >6and CTP core <50cc were independently predictive of good outcome

In another retrospective study with
61 patients, Wu et al reported that CTP parameters had little
predictive value for good clinical outcome, but were useful for
predicting poor clinical outcome after IV tPA treatment.

#Deep learning in stroke management

Rather than
feature engineering, analysis with deep learning focuses on
engineering the right network for the right input signals. In

acute stroke with large volumes of data of uncertain relationship to outcome, 
the ability to automate featurization of
raw inputs for a desired output can be particularly beneficial.
The application of convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
the family of DNN architectures designed to work with
images, to stroke imaging data is a perfect match between
a mature deep learning technique and a data type that is
naturally suited to benefit from deep learning’s strengths

One of the biggest barriers in applying deep learning
techniques to medical data is the scarcity of the large
datasets that are needed to train DNNs. Many of the
current, successful, deep learning strategies have focused
on ways of augmenting datasets, or applying a preprocessing scheme designed to better use the limited amount
of data rather than naively using the data on hand for
training. Perhaps the key criterion for determining what
data is needed, however, is the intended goal of the analysis

The key areas for which deep learning stands to
be imminently applied to stroke management are automated featurization (radiomics), image segmentation, and
multimodal prognostication.

#Deep learning for automated featurization: ischemic tissue
fate

The process of featurizing images, of converting raw images into
a useful parameter that can be used to train subsequent models,
is a key application of CNNs to stroke imaging. It is a commonly
held belief that radiology images can be featurized to facilitate
diverse models, including tumor recurrence, gene expression,
or post-stroke brain tissue fate.1

**Notably, featurization of
target tissues depends on a sufficient signal-to-noise, which can
be improved by target identification via segmentation to select
regions of interest. Segmentation itself is potentially solvable
through deep learning approaches, including CNNs. At present,
however, regions of interest are manually delineated, often by
radiologists, and then subsequently these regions are featurized
and used to model a target process**

and used to model a target process (figure 2).
One of the major strengths of deep learning for this particular
task is that there is no obvious solution that could be obtained
manually. It is unclear how to best go about featurizing a region
of interest on MRI, for example, to predict ischemic tissue fate.
Do we look at homogeneity of contrast uptake? Cerebral blood
volume? Time of flight? The power of a deep learning approach

to predict tissue fate is that we can abstract the featurization
process into the CNN, which requires only raw images and some
measure of outcomes that it is supposed to learn. An excellent
example of this is the prediction of post-stroke MRI fluid-attenuated inversion recovery changes given acute diffusion-weighted
imaging maps

#Deep learning for image segmentation

A public competition, the Ischemic Stroke Lesion Segmentation (ISLES) challenge, was designed to facilitate the development 
of tools for the segmentation of stroke lesions. In the 2015
competition, contestants were challenged to segment subacute
and acute stroke lesions from multispectral MRI scans. The
2015 ISLES challenge is most notable for its winning algorithm, a 3D-CNN, designed by the Imperial College London
team under Benjamin Glocker. Notably, the 3D-CNN model
of Kamnitsas et al applied a patch-based approach similar
to the work of Stier et al, but instead of 2D patches around
pixels, used 3D patches around voxels. The 3D-CNN model
correctly segmented 34/36 of the test MRI volumes with an
average dice coefficient of 0.59±0.31 compared with the next
best method, based on level-set segmentation, which correctly
segmented 32/36 volumes at an average dice coefficient of
0.55±0.300

0.55±0.300.46
In 2016, the contest’s goals were shifted to two clinical tasks—
predicting the 3–9-month lesion volume, and predicting the
final clinical outcome measured by modified Rankin score. The
winner of the first task, led by Hanbyul Lee from Seoul National
University in Korea, used a segmentation model comprising two
deep convolutional neural networks inspired by fully convolutional networks and the U-Net. Their model had an average
dice coefficient of 0.31±0.240.47The winner of the second
task was a team led by Oskar Maier from University zu Lubeck
Germany. They trained a random forest for lesion segmentation,
and extracted lesion characteristics and local image features to
train a regression forest for prediction of outcomes. The model
yielded an average absolute error of 1.05±0.62 on the modified
Rankin score

In 2014, fully convolutional approaches were developed
whereby the FC layers could be completely discarded in favor of
architectures that were built around a series of convolutional and
pooling encoder layers, which were then reversed into deconvolution and upsampling decoder layers to get segmentation results
back into the input space.49 Building on this basic encoder–
decoder framework, most modern techniques use very deep
networks with skip connections, U-net, or completely eliminate
the pooling layers in favor of atrous convolutions.50–52 A particularly appealing advantage of employing atrous convolutions,
particularly for 3D data, is that parameters scale linearly with
depth while the receptive field continues to scale exponentially

**#Deep learning for stroke diagnosis and prognosis**

The rapid automatic identification of stroke is well suited for
application of CNNs to neuroimaging. While stroke is typically first identified by its clinical symptoms, computer-assisted
diagnosis with deep learning can provide an adjunctive means
of rapidly diagnosing stroke and ensuring that it is not missed
on initial CT imaging. Cutting-edge CNNs have become particularly adept at generating text-based captions when presented
with imaging, which makes diagnosis particularly attractive
owing to the natural language caption outputs

Predicting stroke prognosis is also a natural target for deep
learning based models that use imaging as an input. Neural
networks are already being explored extensively as a means
of predicting outcomes for complicated neurological diseases,
and it is natural to suspect that DNNs may also excel at stroke
prognosis.14 53–55 By combining these models with image-based
CNNs, it may be possible to derive prognostic models based on
integrative deep learning that are more accurate by several orders
of magnitude than current models. Beyond the potential benefit
for clinical care, such models might have a substantial impact
on patient allocation during clinical trials to maximally balance
cohorts and better discern the effect of trial interventions

#Conclusion

Recent trials in endovascular stroke intervention have repeatedly shown the importance of patient selection based on
neuroimaging. Stroke imaging data are well suited for deep
learning applications, in areas including automated featurization, image segmentation, and multimodel prognostication.
One of the largest barriers is the complexity of the underlying
deep learning frameworks, which are largely inaccessible to
individuals without advanced training. Stanford’s RAPID tool,
and PRONTO, are two examples of software designed to bring
some of the capabilities of machine learning to clinicians in an
easily accessible manner. Efforts within the machine learning
community to more easily deploy deep learning tools with facile
interfaces such as Keras or Lasagne, are encouraging steps in this
direction, although they still require substantial knowledge of
Python or other programming languages to implement. Perhaps
more helpful/promising are graphical user interface based tools,
such as nVidia’s DIGITS framework, which seeks to democratize the use of deep learning tools with frameworks accessible
to non-programmers. Ultimately, deep learning tools, due to
the speed and power of results they can deliver, will become
an increasingly standard tool in the modern stroke specialist’s
arsenal for delivering personalized medicine to patients with
ischemic stroke.
-------------------------

title: **Opportunities of a Machine Learning-based Decision Support System for
Stroke Rehabilitation Assessment**

muito bom esse artigo

url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/ML%20for%20stroke%20rehab.pdf

notes:

important: nothing with eeg in this article, talks about working with videos of tasks being done

obs: *Rehabilitation assessment* só

#Abstract
**Rehabilitation assessment is critical to determine an adequate intervention for a patient. However, the current practices of assessment
mainly rely on therapist’s experience, and assessment is infrequently executed due to the limited availability of a therapist. In this paper,
we identified the needs of therapists to assess patient’s functional abilities (e.g. alternative perspective on assessment with quantitative
information on patient’s exercise motions). As a result, we developed an intelligent decision support system that can identify salient
features of assessment using reinforcement learning to assess the quality of motion and summarize patient specific analysis. We evaluated
this system with seven therapists using the dataset from 15 patient performing three exercises. The evaluation demonstrates that our
system is preferred over a traditional system without analysis while presenting more useful information and significantly increasing the
agreement over therapists’ evaluation from 0.6600 to 0.7108 F1-scores (p < 0.05). We discuss the importance of presenting contextually
relevant and salient information and adaptation to develop a human and machine collaborative decision making system.**

Using identified salient features and held-out user
data, patient’s unaffected motions, this system can provide user-specific analysis with a visualization interface. This
system empowers therapists to understand patient’s performance with 1) feature analysis with kinematic measurements, 2)
images of salient frames, and 3) trajectory trends (Figure 3). While considerable prior work demonstrates the feasibility of
assessing the quality of motion [38] and focuses on improving the accuracy of a model [23], there is a lack of systematic
evaluations on such technologies.

This paper makes the following contributions:
• enumerate needs of therapists during assessing rehabilitation exercises
• present the design and implementation of an intelligent decision support system for stroke rehabilitation assessment
that can identify salient features using reinforcement learning to predict the quality of motion and generate
user-specific analysis
• describe the quantitative and qualitative evaluation of our system with seven therapists from four rehabilitation
hospitals and pose this system as an approach to support consistent assessmen

Patients with musculoskeletal and neurological disorders (e.g. stroke) require a rehabilitation program over several
months to prevent disability and improve their functional abilities. Performing task-oriented exercises is one of the
effective ways for post-stroke survivors to improve functional ability and lower a chance of having recurrent stroke
[29]. During a rehabilitation program, therapists first diagnose the condition of a patient with various methods (e.g.
analyzing patient’s history, conducting tests, or analyzing measurements) and determine in-home interventions. In the
follow-up visits, therapists discuss patient’s progress or periodically evaluate treatment outcomes to modify interventions
as appropriate [26]. Although assessing patient’s performance on rehabilitation exercises is important for therapists to
adjust interventions, this assessment relies on therapist’s experience [33] and infrequently performed due to the limited
availability of a therapist. In addition, therapists primarily reply on patient’s self-report and do not have any quantitative
performance data to understand how well patients follow the prescribed regimens [12]. Thus, therapists encounter
challenges of understanding patient’s performance and adjusting intervention. As a first step, this paper primarily focuses
on understanding the effect of a machine learning-based decision support system for assessing stroke rehabilitation
exercises

This statistical approach utilizes machine learning
algorithms to process complex sensor data and automatically extract a meaningful function (e.g. Neural Network model)
that can classify the quality of motion [5, 23]. However, no algorithms can completely replicate therapist’s assessment
given patient’s diverse physical characteristics and functional abilities. Moreover, a statistical approach with complex
algorithms cannot explain its prediction to support expert’s decision making [9], which exacerbate therapist’s trust and
experience with a decision support system [16].

In this paper, we aim to increase the interpretability of a model by feature selection [3, 17]. Specifically, we apply
reinforcement learning [21, 37] to identify kinematic salient features for assessment. Utilizing an identified subset of
features, we predict the quality of motion and generate user-specific analysis to summarize patient’s exercise performance
[22]. Our work demonstrates how a tool with predicted assessment and user-specific analysis can affect therapist’s decision
making on rehabilitation assessment.

A substantial body of prior work focus on demonstrating the feasibility of collecting objective kinematic variables to
quantify the performance of rehabilitation exercises [25] and assessing the quality of motion [23]. Yet, there is a lack of
knowledge and evaluation about therapist’s experience on a decision support system for physical rehabilitation monitoring
and assessment. Although clinical decision support systems can improve the practices of healthcare [4], systems might
not be adopted in clinical practices due to lack of user trust and acceptance [6, 16]. Specifically, clinical experts might
not use a system if it is not properly integrated into workflow and does not provide relevant information [6]. This paper
contributes to increase knowledge about therapist’s needs and experience on an intelligent decision support system for
stroke rehabilitation assessment. We conducted a user study with therapists to investigate what types of capabilities
therapists want, how therapists use a system, and how user-specific analysis of a system affect therapist’s attitude about a
system and assessment.

3 STROKE REHABILITATION AS A TEST DOMAIN

Stroke is the second leading cause of death and third most common contributor to disability [8]. As stroke has increased
across the world, we selected stroke rehabilitation as a probe domain. We recruited nine therapists of stroke rehabilitation
from five rehabilitation centers (Table 1) to understand their needs during stroke rehabilitation assessment. Three out
of nine therapists specified the design of our study (i.e. exercises and performance components for assessment). One
therapist annotated the dataset to implement a system for evaluation. Two therapists reviewed our implementation before
running a user study and other seven therapists participated in the evaluation of our implementation.

3.1 Needs during Rehabilitation Assessment

3.1.1 Therapist’s experience-based and Infrequent Assessment.

Therapists mainly rely on their observation and
experience to approximately assess patient’s performance on rehabilitation exercises [31, 36] and determine interventions
[26]. When assessing rehabilitation exercises, therapists commented that “there is no exact single normality for assessment”
(TP 1). Instead, therapists mentioned that they first “check the functionality of unaffected side and define adequate
normality for each patient” (TP 9). Therapists then internally generate hypothetical correctness of a movement with
patient’s unaffected side and then “analyze various aspects of performance: whether a patient can complete an expected
movement and any compensated, not coordinated movement exists” (TP 2). During our observation on a rehabilitation
session, a therapist first asked a patient to perform a motion multiple times or keep at a certain position for a while for
assessment. A therapist then had to keep moving front, back, and side to collect evidences for assessment and expressed a
“difficulty with collecting information on patient’s rehabilitation exercise performance” (TP 3).
When therapists are unsure, they mentioned that they record patient’s movements to review and “re-evaluate more
confidently after a session by watching a video multiple times” (TP 7), or “discuss with other colleagues” (TP 8) on their
experience-based assessment. As the process of the assessment is time consuming, therapists only perform infrequently
the assessment (e.g. every two or three months)


3.1.2 Desire for Alternative Perspectives on Assessment with Quantitative Measurements

All rehabilitation
centers that we visited or discussed do not use any technology for managing stroke rehabilitation. When discussing
opportunities of technological support to assess rehabilitation exercises, therapists referred the need to gain insights on
patient’s performance with alternative perspectives on assessment and quantitative kinematic measurements. As mentioned
before, therapists have “difficulty to detect minor changes over time or discuss with other colleagues” (TP 2) without
quantitative kinematic measurements. In an uncertain situation, a therapist desired to “validate his/her assessment with
alternative assessment from a colleague instead of relying on only my own experience” (TP 8). Overall, therapists desired
a system that can provide “another perspective of assessment with quantitative measurements” (TP 6).
Specifically, therapists want to know “how closely a patient can reach a target motion” and “to which extent a
patient performs a compensated motion” (e.g. “how much a shoulder joint is elevated”) (TP 3) with quantitative
measurements and images of a patient’s motion. In addition, therapists desire to understand whether a motion is smooth
or not. However, as smoothness has abstract definition, therapists have “difficulty with assessing smoothness of a motion”
(TP 1). “Trajectory trends (e.g. showing a graph about how a wrist joint moves during a motion) would be useful to
understand smoothness of motion” (TP 1).

TP 9 commented that her rehabilitation center attempted to use a system to monitor rehabilitation before, but ended
up discard it due its complex and time-consuming process for the usage. For presentation and using a system, TP 9
emphasized that “a system should be easy to use and present insights quickly with graphics given the limited session time
for each patient.”.
Based on our need findings with therapists, we have identified the requirements of an intelligent decision support
system for stroke rehabilitation in Table 2.

tabela no word extra

3.2 Specifications

After having iterative discussion with three therapists (with µ = 6.49, σ = 2.05 years of experience in stroke rehabilitation),
we specified exercises and performance components of assessment to probe how therapists utilize an intelligent decision
support system to assess patient’s rehabilitation exercises.

3.2.1 Three Task-Oriented Upper Limb Exercises. This paper utilizes three upper-limb stroke rehabilitation
exercises (Figure 4), recommended by therapists [20]. In Figure 4, the ‘Initial’ indicates the initial position of an exercise
and the ‘Target’ describes the desired end position of an exercise.
For Exercise 1, a subject has to raise his/her wrist to the mouth as if drinking water. For Exercise 2, a subject has to
pretend touching a light switch on the wall. Exercise 3 is to practice the usage of a cane while extending elbow in the
seated position. These exercises are selected due to their correspondence with major motion patterns: elbow flexion for
Exercise 1, shoulder flexion for Exercise 2, elbow extension for Exercise 3.

3.2.2 Performance Components. After reviewing popular stroke assessment tools (i.e. Fugl Meyer Assessment
[31] and Wolf Motor Function Test [36]) and having iterative discussion with therapists, we identified three common
performance components and their scoring guidelines: ‘Range of Motion (ROM)’, ‘Smoothness’, and ‘Compensation’
(Table 3). The ‘ROM’ component describes the amount of a joint movement to achieve a task-oriented exercise. The
‘Smoothness’ component indicates the degree of a trembling and irregular movement of joints while performing an
exercise. The ‘Compensation’ component checks whether compensated movements are used to achieve a target movement.
For instance, a patient might elevate his/her shoulder to raise the affected hand as shown in Figure 1b and 1d.

3.2.3 Kinematic Features. We utilize an exercise dataset that is composed of sequential joint coordinates of motions
and extract various kinematic features. To represent the ‘ROM’ component, we extract joint angles (e.g. elbow flexion,
shoulder flexion, elbow extension), normalized relative trajectory (i.e. Euclidean distance between two joints - head and
wrist, head and elbow), and normalized trajectory distance (i.e. absolute distance between two joints - head and wrist,
shoulder and wrist) in x, y, z coordinates.


Before extracting features, we apply a moving average filter with the window size of five frames to reduce noise of
acquiring joint positions from a Kinect sensor similar to [34]. For each exercise motion, we compute a feature matrix
(F ∈ R
t×d
) with t frame and d features and statistics (i.e. max, min, range, average, and standard deviation) over all
frames of the exercise to summarize a motion.

4 INTELLIGENT DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR STROKE REHABILITATION ASSESSMENT

Based on identified therapists’ needs, we designed and implemented an intelligent decision support system (Figure 2) that
can identify salient features for assessment using reinforcement learning to predict the quality of motion and generate
user-specific analysis that includes feature analysis, images of salient frames, and trajectory trends (Figure 3). This system
Manuscript submitted to ACM
8 Lee, et al.
enables therapists to review alternative perspectives of patient’s performance with quantitative user-specific analysis for
assessment.

4.1 Prediction Model
The Prediction Model (PM) applies a supervised learning algorithm to predict the quality of motion on each performance
component. We explore various traditional supervised learning algorithms: Decision Trees (DTs), Linear Regression (LR),
Support Vector Machine (SVM) using the ‘Scikit-learn’ [28] library and Neural Networks (NNs) using ‘PyTorch’ [27]
library.
For DTs, we implement Classification and Regression Trees (CART) to build prune trees. For LR models, we apply
L1, L2 regularization or linear combination of L1 and L2 (ElasticNet with 0.5 ratio) to avoid overfitting. For SVMs,
we apply either linear or Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernels with penalty parameter, C = 1.0. For NNs, we gridsearch various 
architectures (i.e. one to three layers with 32, 64, 128, 256, 512 hidden units) and an adaptive learning
rate with different initial learning rates (i.e. 0.0001, 0.005, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1). We apply ‘ReLu’ activation functions and
‘AdamOptimizer’ and train a model until the tolerance of optimization is 0.0001 or the maximum 200 iterations.

anotacao minha: daria pra explorar meta-learning/multi-task learning sepa tb (mas o problema eh limitacao dos dados)

4.2 Feature Selection using Reinforcement Learning
Kinematic variables analysis is an important way for therapists to quantitatively understand patient’s performance [39].
Yet, simply presenting all variables can overwhelm therapists and limit therapist’s ability to gain insights on patient’s
performance. Given the limited availability to administrate multiple patients, therapists want to minimize the amount
of time on analyzing kinematic variables while accurately diagnosing patient’s status. Thus, we aim at automatically
identifying salient features of assessment with machine learning.
The classical approaches of feature selection (e.g. filter, wrapper, embedded methods) [35] find a fixed feature set to
the entire dataset, which applies globally to all patients. Instead, this paper utilizes a Markov Decision Process (MDP) to
select a feature set for each patient’s motions. As each patient has different physical and functional status (Figure 1), we
hypothesize that feature selection with MDP can be beneficial over classical feature selection approaches for personalized
rehabilitation assessment.

4.2.1 Problem Definition. We formulate this problem of feature selection as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where
each episode is to classify an instance and the environment is the power set of the feature space. An agent sequentially
determines whether to query additional feature or classify a sample while receiving a negative reward for recruiting a
feature or mis-classification. To solve this problem, we apply Deep Q-network with Double Q-learning [24, 37] with the
same architectures of Neural Network for the Prediction Model (PM) (Table 6) using ‘PyTorch’ libraries [27].
We mathematically describe the Markov Decision Process (MDP) with similar notations of [7, 15] as follows:
Let (x,y) ∈ D = X × Y be a sample from a dataset, where x is a feature vector and y is the class label. Let F be the set
of identified features and the function c : F → R
≤0 be the cost of adding a feature in F.
• State Space: S, let state s = (x,y, F) ∈ S = X × Y × P(F), and the observed state without the label be
s′ = {(xi, fi) | ∀ features fi ∈ F}.
• Action Space: Let A denote the action set. The agent takes either action ac or afi
∈ A, where ac classifies the instance and afi queries feature fi
.

foto no word do reward e transition pq  ficou zuado passando pra txt


4.3 Visualization Interface

**Based on the therapists’ needs (Section 3.1) and few guidelines of Human Artificial Intelligence (AI) interaction [1, 18],
we implement the web-based visualization interface that presents a predicted performance score and user-specific analysis
that contains feature analysis, images of salient frames, and trajectory trends (Figure 3) to validate and support therapist’s
assessment**. Feature analysis shows quantitative difference between unaffected and affected sides using identified salient
features (Figure 3b). An image of salient frames shows patient’s motion at salient frames, in which salient features are
occurred (Figure 3c). Trajectory analysis describes trends and duration of a joint trajectory during a motion (Figure 3d).
The interface has the tab menus to present videos and each analysis respectively. We implement the javascript functions
to count the video events (e.g. ‘Play’, ‘Pause’) and measure the amount of time that a user spends on each page during
assessment.
As therapists want another perspectives on assessment to validate their own assessment (N2 in the Table 2), this interface
presents the predicted assessment, scores on performance components. When presenting this predicted performance score,
the performance of predictions is also included to “make clear how well the system can do” [1]. In addition, this interface
presents user-specific analysis that is considered “contextually relevant information” [1] on patient’s exercise performance
(N3 in the Table 2) from therapists. Specifically, user-specific analysis of our interface includes the presentation of feature
analysis, images of salient frames, and trajectory trends that are identified during the needs finding study. User-specific
analysis with identified kinematic features is referred as explanations of predicted assessment through out this paper as
described in the Section 2.2.
For simple and intuitive presentation (N4 in Table 2) on quantitative measurements of identified salient features, this
interface utilizes a radar chart to effectively present multivariate data. To “avoid overwhelming” [18] therapists, this
interface limits to include only three salient features with highest information gain. Utilizing selected salient features (e.g.
the maximum target position, maximum elbow flexion), we identify frames in which these salient features are occurred to
present images. In addition, as observing sequential patterns of kinematic variables provides another useful perspective in
some cases (e.g. the assessment of the ‘Smoothness’ performance component), this interface shows trajectories of three
major joints (e.g. shoulder, elbow, and wrist) for upper-limb exercises. As therapists utilize patient’s unaffected motion as
normality to assess patient’s performance (N1 in Table 2), this interface follows this current practice, “social norms” [1]
and includes the comparison between the affected and unaffected side to present salient features and trajectory trends.

duvida: pelo que parece todas as analises que eels apresentam soa com base em EDA
com as features selecionadas, tipo o modelo de predicao só serve pra prever e nao tiram
nenhuma explicacao de dentro dele

5 EXPERIMENT FOR SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

5.1 Data Collection
We recruited 15 stroke patients and 11 healthy subjects to collect the dataset of three upper limb exercises using a Kinect
v2 sensor (Microsoft, Redmond, USA). The data collection program is implemented in C# using Kinect SDK and operated
on a PC with 8GB RAM and i5-4590 3.3GHz 4 Cores CPU. This program records the 3D trajectory of joints and video
frames at 30 Hz. The sensor was located at a height of 0.72m above the floor and 2.5m away from a subject. The starting
and ending frames of exercise movements were manually annotated during the data collection

6 REAL-WORLD USER STUDY
We performed a user study to investigate how the information of an intelligent decision support system (e.g. predicted
performance scores with feature analysis, images of salient frames, trajectory trends) affect therapist’s rehabilitation
assessment. For the user study, we compared the experiences of therapists using our proposed interface (Figure 3) to two
baseline interfaces: ‘Traditional’ interface that presents only videos for assessment and ‘Predicted Scores’ interface that
presents videos with predicted scores without any user-specific analysis. Specifically, we aim to address the following
questions:

RQ 1: How do predicted assessment and user-specific analysis of our tool affect the utility of information, workload,
and trust, compared to two baseline interfaces (one with only videos and the other with videos and only predicted
assessment)? Do predicted assessment and user-specific analysis of our tool support more consistent assessment?
• RQ 2: How do therapists utilize each user-specific analysis for assessment?

6.1 Metrics

We evaluated three interfaces with respect to the following metrics: 1) subjective feedback on questionnaires, 2) logs of
the web-based visualization interface, 3) agreement level of therapists’ evaluation (F1-scores).

6.1.1 Subjective Feedback on Questionnaires. We utilize the following questionnaires [4] to collect therapist’s
subjective feedback on interfaces. All questionnaires were rated on a 7-point scale.
• Usefulness: “[Tool - Condition X] is useful to understand and assess patient’s performance”
• Richness: “[Tool - Condition X] generates new insights on patient’s performance”
• Trust: “I can trust information from [Tool - Condition X]”
• Workload: participants answered the “efforts” and “workload” dimensions of the NASA-TLX [11]
• Usage Intention: “I would use [Tool - Condition X] to understand and assess patient’s performance”
• Preference between two interfaces: participants rated on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (totally Condition X), 2
(much more Condition X than Y), 3 (slightly more Condition X than Y), 4 (neutral), ..., 7 (totally Condition Y).
The preference is asked pairwise on three conditions/interfaces: Condition 1 (‘Traditional’ interface), Condition 2
(‘Predicted Scores’ interface), and Condition 3 (‘Proposed’ interface).

6.1.2 Logs of the Web Interface. Our web interfaces record a log file that counts the number of video events (e.g.
‘Play’, ‘Pause’) and measures the amount of time that a participate spends on each page/resource during assessment.

6.1.3 Agreement Level of Therapists’ Evaluation. Participants generate assessment of patient’s exercise performance
using the interfaces. To understand whether our proposed tool with user-specific analysis supports more consistent
evaluation, we compute the level of agreement of therapists’ evaluation (F1-score) for each interface.


8.3 Agreement Level of Therapists’ Evaluation
Figure 7 shows the agreement level of therapists’ evaluation on three interfaces. Our proposed interface, Condition 3
with predicted assessment and user-specific analysis (i.e. feature analysis, salient frames, and trajectory) achieves higher
agreement on participated therapists’ evaluation (µ = 0.7138 F1-scores) than the others (Condition 1: µ = 0.66 F1-score
(p < 0.05) and Condition 2: µ = 0.6924) F1-score. Although both Condition 2 and 3 achieve higher agreement level than
Condition 1, the difference between Condition 1 and 2 is not statistically significant (p = 0.07), but the difference between
Condition 1 and 3 is statistically significant (p < 0.05). Thus, this indicates the positive effect of including user-specific
analysis on Condition 3 to improve the agreement level of therapists’ evaluation.

9 DISCUSSION

In this section, we synthesize our findings, discuss design recommendations to create a decision support system for
rehabilitation assessment: the importance of 1) presenting appropriate and salient data and 2) deriving an adaptive system
for a personalized human and machine collaborative decision support system, and describe the limitations of our study

9.1.1 Presenting Appropriate and Salient Data to Understand Capabilities of a System. Clinical decision
support systems with machine learning algorithms have a potential to improve the current practices of healthcare. However,
as mentioned earlier, a machine learning model cannot perfectly replicate expert’s knowledge and decision making. A
system without supplementary explanations/information might not be adopted in the practices. Our findings demonstrate
that an intelligent decision support system can automatically identify salient features of decision making (e.g. rehabilitation
assessment) to predict expert’s decision making and generate explanations on its prediction (e.g. user-specific analysis with
kinematic features). User-specific analysis from a system enables experts to gain new insights on patient’s performance
and reduce efforts and workload for assessment. In additions, while reviewing user-specific analysis, therapists can
validate their hypothetical assessment and the correctness of a system to understand the competence of a system on a task.
Although we demonstrate the feasibility of a decision support system for stroke rehabilitation assessment, the applied
techniques of feature selection and prediction models can be utilized to other sub-domains of rehabilitation (e.g. knee
rehabilitation [14]), where an expert with limited availability needs to make a decision

In addition, TP 6 suggested that it would be useful if a therapists can tune a system by including/excluding identified
features to utilize different features based on individual therapist’s experience and to correct any mismatched prediction
scores. For instance, as the prediction on compensation from an interface does not predict assessment correctly time
to time when a patient performs leaning compensation to the side, TP 9 commented to include a “leaning trunk to the
side” feature to predict compensation. Thus, designers should consider applying interactive techniques [18, 22] to make a
system adaptive and personalized for better integration into each therapist’s clinical practices.

9.1.3 Towards Human and Machine Collaborative Systems. In summary, instead of manually reviewing abundant
features, machine intelligence can automatically identify salient features to provide useful insights on patient’s performance
to validate the prediction of a system and support therapist’s assessment. After reviewing predicted assessment and
automatically generated patient-specific analysis of a system, therapists understood the strengths and limitation of a
system to consider how it can support them. Although a system sometimes disagrees with therapist’s decision, therapists
considered reviewing explanations is helpful to “understand patient’s performance and validate my/therapist’s assessment”
(TP 7). After improving understanding on patientâA˘ Zs performance, therapists generated more consistent evaluation ´
(Figure 7). In addition, a therapist was able to enumerate how to improve an imperfect system. A promising direction
of **future research is to explore how human and machine intelligence can complement each other to improve a complex
decision making**.

9.2 Limitations

This study aims to investigate how an intelligent decision support system with predicted assessment and user-specific
analysis can support therapist’s assessment on rehabilitation exercises. One of the limitations of this study is that the small
sample size of participated therapists for evaluation: seven therapists from four rehabilitation centers do not represent all
therapists. However, such small sample size is not unusual among similar studies [13]. In addition, although therapists
expressed positive opinions about an intelligent decision support system, **we evaluated only one possible type of decision
making of therapists, rehabilitation assessment. Other decision makings are worth exploring and require further validation**


#CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented the needs of therapists during rehabilitation assessment and designed a decision support
system that identifies salient features to predict the quality of motion and generate user-specific analysis as explanations
on predictions. We then evaluated this system with seven therapists from four rehabilitation centers to investigate how
predicted assessment and user-specific analysis of the system affect therapist’s decision making on stroke rehabilitation
assessment. Presenting predicted assessment and user-specific analysis increases the trust on a system and brings new
insights of assessment. In addition, the proposed system enables therapists to reduce their workload (e.g. repeatedly
watching videos to identify evidences) and generate more consistent assessment. Our work highlights the importance
of creating user-centered and trustful machine learning-based systems to augment expert’s decision making process
and deploy in the practices. We believe this study can be a valuable reference to develop decision support systems for
rehabilitation assessment and other critical decision supports.

-------------------------

title: Abstract TMP46: EEG is a Useful Biomarker of Motor Recovery in Early Stroke Rehabilitation

doi: https://doi.org/10.1161/str.50.suppl_1.TMP46

notes:

#Introduction: The application of biomarkers to study and monitor stroke recovery mechanisms can potentially 
advance rehabilitation practice and research. This study examined the utility of dense-array electroencephalography 
(EEG) for predicting and capturing changes in brain function in early stroke rehabilitation.

#Hypothesis: Changes in EEG measures involving ipsi- and contralesional motor cortices (iM1 and cM1) in delta (1-3Hz) 
and high beta (20-30Hz) frequency bands [1] parallel and [2] predict motor recovery.

#Methods: Individuals with recent ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke admitted to an inpatient rehabilitation facility (IRF) 
completed a 3-minute resting-state EEG recording and behavioral testing (Upper Extremity Fugl-Meyer (FM) and Functional 
Independence Measurement motor subscale (FIM-motor)) during hospitalization and 90-days post-stroke. EEG power and 
coherence (connectivity) measures were computed from leads overlying iM1 and cM1.

#Results: Twenty-seven subjects (20 males, age 58.3±14.6 years, 14.7±12.8 days post-stroke) participated. Greater 
decrease in iM1-cM1 coherence in the delta band correlated significantly with larger (a) FIM-motor score improvement 
from IRF admission to discharge (r=-0.70, p=0.001, n=18) and (b) FM score improvement from IRF admission to 90-days 
post-stroke (r=-0.57, p=0.02, n=17). Baseline EEG measures did not predict motor recovery when examined across the entire group. Performance of biomarkers varies according to stroke severity, and so prediction was further examined in relation to baseline FM. In subjects with moderate-severe impairment (FM≤40), delta iM1-cM1 coherence at baseline correlated with FIM-motor gains (r=0.72, p=0.03, n=9), and delta power in leads over iM1 positively correlated with FM gains (a) from IRF admission to discharge (r=0.75, p=0.03, n=8) and (b) from IRF admission to 90-days post-stroke (r=0.73, p=0.04, n=8).

#Conclusions: Bedside EEG recording in the IRF provides neurophysiological insights that predict and parallel motor 
recovery, and so may be a valuable bedside tool in early stroke rehabilitation. EEG measures can predict motor 
recovery in individuals with moderate-severe motor impairment.

-------------------------

title: BCI for stroke rehabilitation: motor and beyond

url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/BCI%20for%20stroke%20rehabilitation%20-%20motor%20and%20beyond.pdf

notes:

#Abtract

beyond motor
In recent years, brain–computer interface (BCI)-based
therapy has shown promising results for post-stroke motor rehabilitation. In spite of the success
received by BCI-based interventions in the motor domain, non-motor impairments are yet to
receive similar attention in research and clinical settings. Some preliminary encouraging results in
post-stroke cognitive rehabilitation using BCI seem to suggest that it may also hold potential for
treating non-motor deficits such as cognitive and emotion impairments. Moreover, past studies
have shown an intricate relationship between motor, cognitive and emotion functions which might
influence the overall post-stroke rehabilitation outcome. A number of studies highlight the
inability of current treatment protocols to account for the implicit interplay between motor,
cognitive and emotion functions. **This indicates the necessity to explore an all-inclusive treatment
plan targeting the synergistic influence of these standalone interventions.This approach may lead
to better overall recovery than treating the individual deficits in isolation**. In this paper, we review
the recent advances in BCI-based post-stroke motor rehabilitation and highlight the potential for
the use of BCI systems beyond the motor domain, in particular, in improving cognition and
emotion of stroke patients. Building on the current results and findings of studies in individual
domains, we next discuss the possibility of a holistic BCI system for motor, cognitive and affect
rehabilitation which may synergistically promote restorative neuroplasticity. Such a system would
provide an all-encompassing rehabilitation platform, leading to overarching clinical outcomes and
transfer of these outcomes to a better quality of living. This is one of the first works to analyse the
possibility of targeting cross-domain influence of post-stroke functional recovery enabled by
BCI-based rehabilitation


1. Introduction

Stroke is a highly prevalent, life-threatening neurovascular emergency. It is the fifth largest cause of
death worldwide and is also one of the leading reasons for acquired disabilities in adults
The number of stroke incidents has been projected to be
rising steadily with increasingly ageing population.
Also, improvements in healthcare technology has
resulted in decrease in stroke fatalities leading to a
large and increasing number of people living with
permanent post-stroke impairments. It is estimated
that close to 1% of the world population is living
with after-effects of cerebrovascular incidents [1].
Impaired motor control [2], general cognitive deficits
[3–5], difficulties in generating or processing speech
[6], and altered emotional state [7] are some of the
commonly observed debilitating effects of stroke.

With close to 30% of survivors suffering from
chronic motor disabilities, hemiplegia or hemiparesis
is the most common and the most disabling condition
post-stroke [1, 8]. Therefore, the majority of efforts
in post-stroke rehabilitation target motor function
restoration and there is a growing need for better
and efficient rehabilitative interventions. In the last
decade, brain-computer interface (BCI) systems have
emerged as one of the promising tools for motor
function restoration

In the context of motor rehabilitation, BCI systems
decode the patients’ intention to move their affected
limb and these decoded intentions are then used
to provide a contingent sensory-motor feedback to
the patient in various forms like actual movement,
haptic feedback, visual feedback, etc. Recent studies indicate that by bridging the stroke-induced gap
between motor intention and sensory feedback of
motor movement, BCI-based interventions may lead
to functional recovery [10, 11]. Furthermore, growing
clinical evidence suggests that BCI may be as effective
as some of the best traditional interventions for p

Besides motor deficits, stroke patients also frequently suffer from cognitive impairments. Various
studies have indicated that as many as 25%–80%
of the stroke survivors suffer from post-stroke cognitive impairments (PSCI) [21]. The vast majority of rehabilitation of PSCI is done via conventional therapy. Recent studies have demonstrated the
efficacy of computer-assisted cognitive rehabilitation
(CACR) over traditional methods of cognitive training [22, 23]. CACR-based methods facilitate homebased therapy and reduce the need for an in-person
training. Furthermore, BCI-based systems, while
being a subtype of CACR systems, have also been
shown to renormalize neurophysiological mechanisms of altered cognitive functions in disorders such
as attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD)
[24, 25]. This renormalized brain activity was seen
to correlate with reduced cognitive impairments. Not
surprisingly, preliminary results from recent case
studies have provided promising evidence for use
of BCI-based cognitive training in stroke patients
[23, 26]. Further studies are necessary to convincingly
demonstrate the efficacy of BCI-based intervention
for cognitive rehabilitation in stroke patients

PSD is another major deficit that has been
seen to affect other rehabilitative efforts by reduced
patient engagement. In fact depression is only one
of the many other psychoemotional deficits faced
by stroke survivors. Other emotion-based disorders
have also been observed in stroke patients such as
general anxiety disorders [18]. In spite of having high
prevalence, depressive and other emotion-related
deficits typically receive the least amount of attention
during post-stroke rehabilitation even though they
have been attributed as critical bottlenecks in transferring improved clinical outcomes to quality of living
[27]. Many patients do not seem to respond to current treatments for emotion deficits which are mostly
based on pharmacotherapy and are known to have
adverse side-effect profiles. **It has been suggested that
close-loop brain stimulation-based techniques monitored in real time using BCIs may thus provide an
effective means of treatment for stroke-induced emotional dysfunctions**

Self-regulation and real-time monitoring of
one’s mental states thereby provides an important
mechanism for re-learning of lost functions due to
stroke. Thus, BCIs offer a huge potential to develop
an all-encompassing and holistic treatment for stroke.
This paper also provides a fresh perspective to BCIbased stroke rehabilitation by specifically targeting
the cross-domain influence of functional recovery
and neuroplastic changes brought about by neurofeedback training. Figure 1 depicts the various facets
of post-stroke deficits. More importantly, it also
helps visualize the aforementioned possible interactions between the various domains of stroke induced
impairments and how their interrelationships can aid
or exacerbate their recovery during post stroke rehab

The aim of this paper is not only to highlight how
BCIs can potentially be used to address these various
types of impairments but also provide some suggestions on how it may serve as a worthy platform for
exploiting the cross-domain influences of the recovery of important neurophysiological functions for a
more comprehensive rehabilitation.

*how the paper is organized:*
We first review the recent advances in BCI-based
motor rehabilitation. We then present recent findings that indicate the effect of cognitive and affect
impairments on motor and overall stroke rehabilitation outcome and highlight the interaction between
these major functions. Building on the findings from
motor domain, we analyse the feasibility of BCI-based
intervention for cognitive and affect rehabilitation.
Lastly, we discuss the potential of realising a holistic
BCI system for comprehensive motor, cognitive and
affect rehabilitation targeting the multifaceted poststroke impairments.

2. Principles of BCI for rehabilitation

There are primarily two BCI strategies pursued
to improve quality of life among stroke impaired
patients. The first strategy, named assistive BCI, aims
to altogether bypass the damaged neuronal pathways
by providing a continuous and permanent alternative for communication and control of external devices
[9]. The second strategy, that is called rehabilitative
BCI, aims for the recovery of damaged neuronal
links and thereby the restoration of impaired functional capabilities by effective facilitation of neuroplasticity [29]. Since functional independence and
return to normal life without the need of any supportive devices is desired, rehabilitative BCIs have
always been preferred in post-stroke therapy and are
the focus of this review

Neuroplasticity is the brain’s ability to undergo
substantial structural and functional reorganisation
throughout human life and it forms the scientific
basis of all the rehabilitative efforts of brain restoration [30, 31]. In fact, numerous neuro-imaging
studies have confirmed that the cognitive and motor
function improvements following post-stroke rehabilitation are associated with structural modification
and functional recovery in the brain [11, 31]
it is postulated that the effectiveness of any poststroke rehabilitative intervention will be dependent
on its ability to promote restorative neuroplasticity [11].

The stimulation of neuroplasticity from BCI
intervention can be conceptualised primarily into
four mechanisms; viz, 1. Neurofeedback training,
2. Operant conditioning by reinforcement, 3. Reinforcement of neuronal circuits by repetitive engagement and, 4. Hebbian learning.

1:
Neurofeedback training refers to the volitional/conscious modulation of brain activations by
the user [32]. Reduced cortical activity and slowing
of brain rhythms in the insulted hemisphere are some
of the well-known deficits following stroke and are
posited to be associated with motor and cognitive
impairments [33, 34]. Neurofeedback training targets these abnormal activations with the philosophy
that restoration of brain activations to ‘more normal’ state will result in functional recovery [10]. To
achieve this goal, the patients are provided with a
continuous visualization of the brain activity from
certain regions and are asked to volitionally up or
down regulate this activity. As an example, in multiple motor rehabilitation studies, patients are asked
to up-regulate the cortical activity in the mu and beta
bands from the lesioned primary or supplementary motor areas to achieve improvements in upper
limb motor functions [13, 35–37]Similar studies
have been conducted in the cognitive domain as well,
wherein patients aim to increase their attention index
which is calculated from EEG such as the beta/theta
band power from the prefrontal region as a treatment
for ADHD [38, 39]. 
*It has been shown that repetitive neurofeedback training results in a long-term
and sustained change in the targeted activation patterns and this change is associated with a reduction
in functional impairments [13, 35–37, 40].

2:
Operant conditioning by reinforcement is one
of the classical mechanisms of human learning
wherein modification in the strength of a behaviour is achieved by rewarding the desired actions
and punishing the undesired ones [41]. In the context of BCI, the operant conditioning is achieved
by rewarding the patient in a form of visual or
sensory feedback upon successful elicitation of the
targeted action and providing negative or no feedback on insufficient activations. Most of the BCI systems designed for motor rehabilitation follow this
mechanism wherein the successful elicitation of the
attempted/imagined limb movement by the patient is
rewarded by actual movement of the stroke-affected
limb using a robot or electrical stimulation whereas
an unsuccessful attempt does not produce any movement [42–46]
**This kind of intrinsic, contingent and
scheduled reward of success is expected to the drive
neuroplastic changes in the same way as the human
brain learns to interact with a novel stimulus. Also,
repetitive success is sought to drive motivation which
in-turn may enhance the rehabilitative efficacy of the
BCI intervention [10]**.

1 e 2:
***The effectiveness of the neurofeedback training
and operant conditioning highly depends on identification of the best cortical activation target to
train, which is not a trivial task***. 
anotaca ominha: oportunidade pra ML aqui talvez?
que eu tinha falado antes do movimento otimo

3:
Hence, to altogether
circumvent this problem, rather than training on a
particular rhythm, some BCI systems focus on natural tasks as a whole. As an example, some of the BCI
systems for motor rehabilitation train the patients
to perform motor movement/imagination [47–52].

The training is achieved by first recording the whole
brain activation pattern associated with the specified
tasks and then strengthening it by repetitive training
wherein identification of this pattern is provided with
rewarding feedback. The fact that multiple brain systems are involved in the execution of most of the cognitive, and motor tasks and simultaneous activation,
and successful coordination between these systems is
necessary for functional improvement forms the basis
for this mechanism

Hence, the BCI-based, task-focused training that results in repetitive recruitment of the normal motor
or cognitive circuits, may strengthen the stroke
affected neuronal connectivity leading to functional
improvements.

4:

provements.
‘Neurons that fire together wire together’, which
is the principle of Hebbian plasticity, is thought to
be one of the important neuronal repair mechanisms stimulated by the BCI systems, particularly in
the motor rehabilitation settings. Motor impairments
following stroke create a gap between motor intention
and execution wherein patients’ intention to move
does not produce any actual movement which results
in the lack of sensory feedback to the brain [10, 55].
Some of the BCI systems aim to bridge this gap and
close the natural motor loop by providing immediate sensory feedback using robotic or haptic devices
that is contingent with users’ movement intention
[43, 47–52, 56, 57]. Here, it is hypothesised that
re-establishing the contingency between cortical activity related to the attempted or imagined movement and the proprioceptive feedback
(actual movement) may strengthen the sensorymotor loop and stimulate the neuroplasticity that
leads to motor recovery. This simultaneous activation
of the outputs and inputs to the motor cortex which
triggers the Hebbian plasticity has been thought of
as a mechanism behind the neuroplasticity following
these rehabilitative interventions [30, 31, 56].

*
Lastly, the above-mentioned mechanisms are
complementary to each other and hence, depending
upon the selection of neuronal rehabilitation target
and the design of the feedback modality, any rehabilitative BCI system may stimulate the brain recovery
by any or all of the mentioned mechanisms.
*

3. BCI for post-stroke motor rehabilitation

Since reinforcement learning and Hebbian plasticity are thought to be important mechanisms of BCI
operation, the role and design of feedback which acts
as a reward, is very crucial. Studies have explored
the clinical efficacy of numerous feedback modalities like visual [60–62], robotic[47, 50, 67–69], functional electrical stimulation (FES) [13, 48, 64], neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) [70], and
more recently, virtual reality (VR) [71, 72] with the
main aim to provide perceptual and sensory feedback
and all these modalities have been observed to elicit motor recovery when used in conjunction with
the BCI control. However, how the selection of these
modalities and the design of the feedback paradigm
affect clinical outcomes is still elusive. For example,
in a controlled study [73], the authors reported that
sensory feedback of movement may be the crucial element of the BCI-based rehabilitation and visual feedback alone is not sufficient to evoke functional gains.
This observation becomes counter-intuitive in light
of the clinical gains following multiple studies using
neurofeedback based BCIs [36, 61, 74]. These results may be caused by the type of interface used for
visual feedback and hence the effect of the presentation technique used for visual feedback needs to
be investigated [75]. Moreover, immersive feedback
provided by the VR systems may help in enhancing
the effect of visual feedback [71, 72]
Furthermore,
contingent sensory feedback using robotics, FES or
NMES is thought to promote the neuronal repairby stimulating the Hebbian plasticity

However, it is
necessary to explore if the similar clinical recovery can
be achieved without the afferent sensory feedback. If
equivalent gains can be achieved by using only a visual
or VR feedback then it can lead to a much more portable, simpler and affordable rehabilitation system that
can be used at home which is one of the ultimate goals
for the BCI technology.

picking right latency in feedback: still open problrm
Contingent and concomitant activation of the
cortical areas is essential for the stimulation of
Hebbian plasticity. Hence, timing and latency of feedback become important parameters in the BCI studies that provide sensory feedback. It is postulated that
following motor intention, the afferent sensory feedback generated by actual movement is responsible
for disinhibition of motor cortex and hence the timing of this disinhibition may be an important factor
in determining the effectiveness of motor learning
[76]. One initial lower limb rehabilitation study also
highlights this point where it is observed that only
the group that received a common peroneal nerve
stimulation (CPNS) timed to reach the brain at the
peak negative phase of the MRCP resulted in functional improvements [77]. Also, one recent upper
limb rehabilitation study examined the effect of different feedback interval in a robotic rehabilitation
study [78]. Although significant functional improvements were observed, conclusive remarks on optimal
timing and latency of feedback could not be extracted. Hence, more studies are necessary to identify the
optimal feedback duration and standardisation of the
same in future BCI systems is essential.

**
The widespread inclusion of BCI systems in the
regular rehabilitation practice necessitates knowledge
about how the duration, intensity and frequency of
BCI rehabilitation affect the clinical outcome. One
initial study indicates that the total number of sessions and BCI intensity (BCI trials/session) and not
the frequency of sessions impacts the final clinical outcomes and neurological improvements [79].
However, another study reported that clinical gains
on the Action Research Arm Test scale were not
dependent on the BCI usage time [80]. Considering
the clinical relevance, lack of studies, and contradicting evidence, investigation in this direction is
required.
**

A few BCI-based upper limb rehabilitation studies have explored the addition of non-invasive brain
stimulation (NIBS) as adjuvant therapy. NIBS, which
can be provided as a transcranial magnetic stimulation or transcranial direct current stimulation
**(tDCS)**, is generally administered just prior to a
BCI rehabilitation session to modify the cortical
activation state [81, 82]. In stroke patients, generally, excitatory NIBS stimulation is applied over the
ipsilesional motor cortex (M1) and inhibitory NIBS
stimulation is applied over contralesional M1 with an
aim to target the reduced ipsilesional M1 activations
and increased inter-hemispheric inhibition

The facilitatory state of the brain following NIBS
has been thought to have a priming effect that may
enhance the effectiveness of the succeeding BCI therapy [81]. Hence, in recent years a few studies have
combined the NIBS with BCI-based rehabilitation
[49, 84–86] **but the additive clinical benefits of NIBS
are not clear**. Two controlled studies that have used
tDCS for brain priming have reported similar clinical outcomes in control and experimental groups
[49, 85]. However, despite similar clinical gains,
neuroimaging studies indicate that the brain recovery mechanisms stimulated by BCI and BCI+tDCS
intervention are very distinct [53, 87, 88]. These findings indicate a potential for sequential training using
BCI and BCI+NIBS interventions with a possibility
of additive clinical gains

Also, before proceeding with the inhibitory stimulation of the contralesional hemisphere using NIBS,
thorough understanding of the role of the contralesional hemisphere in the post-stroke condition is
necessary. It is a general consensus that the contralesional hemisphere shows increased activation following stroke [83]. It is postulated that this increased
activation results in an enhanced inhibitory drive on
the lesioned hemispheres [83]. Contrarily, a few studies suggest that the increased activation in the contralesional hemisphere is the brain’s attempt to compensate for the lost ipsilesional functions [30]. BCI
rehabilitation trials have been conducted on the basis
of both positive [80, 89] and negative [49, 86] role
of the contralesional hemisphere and all these studies have shown clinical improvements. 
**Hence, more
knowledge about the role of the contralateral hemisphere is necessary and this may lead to some major
modifications in the existing BCI protocol**

much more focused efforts are necessary along this
direction.
 **
Many important challenges like the deep
cortical representation of foot area, distributed control of gait between cortical neurons and central pattern generators [90], and high level of EMG contamination of neurological signals due to associated
motor feedback need to be overcome to achieve widespread use of BCI for lower limb motor rehabilitation
**

**
Lastly, upper limb rehabilitation studies indicate
that the motor function improvements following BCI
rehabilitation may be associated with the accuracy of
the BCI system. Many studies have observed a significant correlation between the BCI accuracy and clinical gains [51, 63, 64, 94, 95]. Moreover, most of the
controlled trials wherein the control group received
random feedback, which is essentially a chance level
accurate system, have reported far less functional
improvements compared to the experimental group
[13, 43, 61, 64]. The reason for this association
between BCI accuracy and improvement is not clearly
understood. One hypothesis is that higher BCI accuracy may elevate the level of confidence and motivation in patients which may better promote rewardbased plasticity. Moreover, higher BCI accuracy may
also impart greater patient engagement whereas irrelevant feedback from a less accurate BCI system may
result in frustration and hence can negatively affect
the rehabilitation [61].
**

Also, greater engagement may
be associated with a higher level of patient attention
and this may be one of the reasons behind the success of BCI rehabilitation. This role of attention has
been highlighted by one rehabilitation study wherein
rehabilitation by attention-based BCI system lead to
significant improvements in lower limb motor functions [14]. All these results point towards a complex
interaction between motor and various cognitive and
affect factors and hence indicate a need for further
exploration of the effect of cognition and affect on
motor recovery.

4. BCI for post-stroke cognitive training

Besides motor deficits, stroke patients also frequently
suffer from cognitive impairments. Cognitive impairments can be seen as a multitude of deficits ranging
from inattentive symptoms, slowing of information processing, deficits in memory, deterioration
of semantic fluency and difficulties in generating or
processing speech or aphasia [96–98]. Speech and
language enable complex mental activity such as
complex reasoning, forming abstractions and generalisations. Thus, a deficit affecting such critical
functions typically has a deep debilitating effect on
cognitive functions [98]. Besides cognitive impairments, many of these patients also suffer from other
stroke-induced deficits such as motor and PSD. PSCI
has been seen to affect the overall rehabilitation outcomes of patients [97]. Most therapies, including

**
BCI-based motor rehabilitation, require a certain
minimum cognitive ability of the patient to comprehend and respond to the instructions for carrying
out the rehabilitative regimes [47, 50, 60]. Moreover,
MI-BCI and other computerised therapies require the
patient to maintain sustained attention to the task
paradigm for extended periods of time. A patient
with severe cognitive impairment who is incapable
of meeting such cognitive demands is automatically
excluded from rehabilitation and as a result leads a
significantly poor quality of life [47, 50, 60]. Therefore, enabling a patient to become acceptable for
most regimes of post-stroke rehabilitation could be
an important objective for cognitive training.
**

For patients with moderate to severe PSCI, critical cognitive functions have been seen to improve
with traditional methods of post-stroke cognitive
training [22]. Surprisingly, while motor functions
have typically received a great amount of attention using BCI-based rehabilitation and BCIs have
shown great promise in facilitating motor rehabilitation, post-stroke cognitive training using BCIs is
still relatively much less explored [99, 100].

Since
the effects of BCI-based neurofeedback training have
been seen to improve certain cognitive functions in
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative conditions such as attention-related hyperactive disorder
(ADHD) [101, 102] and mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) in elderly subjects [103], respectively, it is
therefore also likely to generalise to other dysfunctions, including PSCI

. Specifically, in previous studies, BCIs have shown promising results for attention
training, for instance, in ADHD children, EEG-based
neurofeedback therapy showed significant improvement in inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptoms [101, 104]. Such results have also been observed
by other groups [102, 105]. Besides EEG-based evaluation of brain waves, even neuroimaging-based realtime neurofeedback have recently been shown to
provide an effective modality for cognitive training
for adolescents with ADHD [106].

 Thus, spatially
targeted enhancement of cortical regions for selfregulation could be another method which could
be used for cognitive training. Encouraging evidence across multiple studies demonstrating the efficacy of neurofeedback-based cognitive training has
also been shown by a recent meta-analysis [107].
The authors concluded that neurofeedback training indeed led to significant clinical improvement
in reducing ADHD symptoms. Thus, from a behavioural perspective, BCIs have consistently shown
to effectively use neurofeedback-training to improve
sustained attention.

From a neurophysiological perspective, various observations have been reported that explain
the underlying neuromechanisms of neuroplasticity that occur as a result of neurofeedback-based
cognitive training. One of the bases for EEGbased neurofeedback training is said to be the
re-normalization of EEG patterns that result in
improvement of inattentive symptoms [24, 25].

Moreover, various neuroimaging studies have sought
to determine the underlying neuromechanisms of
clinical improvement following using neurofeedbacktraining [24, 123, 124]. The fact that neurofeedbackbased self-learning can induce such functional
changes in the underlying neural properties has
important implications for cognitive training for
stroke wherein neuroplastic changes have been key
to enable repair and restoration of body functions.

A few recent studies have investigated cognitive training in stroke patients using neurofeedbackbased treatments.
For instance,
a recent case-study of two chronic stroke patients
using neurofeedback-based cognitive training has
also shown promising preliminary results [129]. In
this study, the intervention was specifically designed
to enhance the alpha activity of the patients for both
cognitive and motor improvements. Interestingly, the
patients also showed improvements in their emotional variables and one of them showed improvements in their speech patterns. This may reflect
the ubiquitous functional role of the alpha band
for a spectrum of motor and cognitive functions
[130–132] and aiming to enhance its activity may
be a good strategy to induce a multitude of functional improvements in stroke patients

In fact, neurofeedback strategies aiming at theta inhibition and
upper alpha and beta activation have been reported
to improve a multitude of cognitive functions as well
as the mood profile of the patient [125–128, 133].
This strategy may therefore be extremely valuable
for a comprehensive stroke rehabilitation program.
In another study, n = 44 stroke patients were randomly allocated to a neurofeedback training (NFB)
group, a CACR group and a control (CON) group for
cognitive training [23]. Although all groups improved
significantly from pre-intervention baseline, the NFB
group showed changes in electrophysiological markers after intervention. This observation provides
further encouragement to use BCI-based neurofeedback training for cognitive rehabilitation after
stroke. More importantly, it reinforces the ability of
BCIs to promote neuroplastic changes during training which is quintessential to stroke rehabilitation
[25]


Given the broad range of cognitive impairments
that can result from stroke, some discussion of the
relationship between the type of cognitive impairment and the type of BCI-based neurofeedback training used for stroke rehabilitation is warranted. 

Past
studies, including both RCTs as well as case studies,
have listed a number of different post stroke cognitive deficits, including inability to maintain sustained
attention, deficits in short term, long term and working memory and inability to comprehend or make
speech to name a few. A central theme of almost all
BCI-based neurofeedback training studies has been
to enable self-regulation of particular EEG frequencies that seem to play multifunctional or even fundamental roles in facilitating a wide range of cognitive
deficits. 

It can be found from table 3 that the NFT
strategies used across studies have mainly aimed to
restrict lower EEG waves such as delta, theta and lower
alpha which were found to be abnormally higher in
stroke patients before the intervention. This was commonly seen alongside NFT to enhance higher EEG
frequencies such as upper alpha and mid-beta. Such
similar strategies were seen to improve a number of
cognitive (and motor) functions, especially, attention
and memory. This could be a result of the ubiquitous role that are attributed to these EEG frequencies and self-regulation of these bands can therefore
have the potential to impact a number of different
cognitive functions [130, 139]. Moreover, the brain
areas used to provide the neurofeedback and enable
self-regulation are just as important to note. While
some studies used the electrodes that were over the
affected brain areas [17, 126], SMR waves were also
used in some studies to provide neurofeedback for
cognitive functions [26, 128, 134]. An excellent discussion on the role of SMR-based neurofeedback is
provided in [26]. Moreover, certain areas such as the
frontal cortex have been reported to contain important hubs in attention and cognitive brain networks
and have therefore been attributed to be important
seats for cognitive functions [140–142]. Therefore,
a re-normalizing effect of such brain networks can
help improve multiple cognitive functions. However,
it is also important to consider that although BCIbased cognitive training has been seen to have an
impact on several cognitive functions, a few studies
have also alluded to certain specific improvements
seen to be enhanced by a particular EEG frequency
used for neurofeedback. For instance, in [26], it was
also seen that NFT the group using the upper alpha
band had more specific improvements in short-term
memory compared to the other group that used the
SMR waves. The latter had more specific improvements in working memory. Given that there are very
few studies which have studied the impact of specific
frequencies on the recovery of cognitive functions of
patients, it is therefore important to have more such

Voluntary physical exercise has been reported to cause an increase in
the hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor -
a protein that is vital to cognitive functioning, especially long-term memory [143]. Therefore, restoration of motor functions may enable a person to better
perform physical exercises, which might then help in
cognitive repair as well

Voluntary physical exercise has been reported to cause an increase in
the hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor -
a protein that is vital to cognitive functioning, especially long-term memory [143]

Moreover, it has been reported that increased cerebral blood flow (CBF) as a result of physical exercise has neuroprotective properties
and promotes motor function [144]. This enhanced
CBF induced by aerobic exercises may thus act as
a priming tool for cognitive training. Aerobic exercises have also been reported to increase arousal levels
which may lead to enhanced memory retrieval and
cognitive task performance [145]

Combined cognitive and physical exercise training has also been
shown to enhance cognitive functioning in the elderly wherein the authors speculated the recruitment
of compensatory processes during physical exercise as
key to enhancement in cognitive functioning [146].

Given the above observations on the interplay between motor and cognitive functions, we
therefore contemplate that combined cognitive and
motor training is crucial for a comprehensive stroke
treatment. Also, the transfer of improvements in
the individual impairment domains may crucially
depend on this implicit relationship between the two
systems.

5. BCI for post-stroke emotion & mood
regulation

t. Thus, lack of motivation leads
to a lack of action which can adversely affect rehabilitation outcome where the patient must actively participate in rehabilitation exercises in order to improve
his/her functions

Another view that may hold in the context of stroke
rehabilitation is a feeling of ‘impossibility’ [153].
That is, a person may have a desire to participate
in rehabilitation exercises and restore his movement
but is overcome by the feeling of the goal being too
difficult to achieve.

For BCI-based stroke rehabilitation, encouraging
results have recently been obtained which suggest that
BCI-based interventions may hold the key to penetrate the lack of motivation felt by stroke survivors due
to PSD. A few studies have investigated techniques for
uplifting the mood profile of stroke patients and their
effects on functional outcomes during post-stroke
rehabilitation. For instance, a recent study on n = 65
stroke patients analysed the effect of music on uplifting the mood profile of stroke patients undergoing
motor and cognitive rehabilitation [20]. Not only did
the music-based therapy find improved mood profile of participants, the group receiving music-therapy
also showed better functional outcomes compared to
controls who received conventional therapy without
music. Another study on a smaller sample of n = 8
of stroke subjects, the BCI performance of upper
limb MI was found to be correlated with interest and
motivation [19]. Thus, BCIs may be used as a tool
to regain motivation and willingness to actively participate in rehabilitation which is necessary to improve
motor and/or cognitive functions. Since MI-based
paradigms can be used even by patients whose motor
functions are severely affected, in theory, encouraging
BCI performance using a powerful BCI decoder could
act as a stimulant to boost a subject’s mood profile
and motivation

Another recent and interesting prospect
for emotion regulation has been in the integration
of music therapy along with BCIs which has shown
promising results [155]. Furthermore, in recent years,
real-time neuroimaging based neurofeedback training has also shown the ability to self-regulate emotions by targeting the activation of the amygdala
[156]. Since amygdala is a deeper lying brain structure, its influence on EEG activity is not well understood. However, using simultaneous neuroimaging
and EEG recordings, activation of the amygdala has
been seen to be correlated with EEG-based biomarkers [157] which could further help the development
of EEG-based BCI systems for emotion regulation

Thus, there is plenty of scope for BCIs to be used
for emotion and affect training especially for stroke
patients.

6. Future prospects: holistic BCI
intervention

Aerobic exercises prior to cognitive rehabilitation help in increasing CBF and arousal which tend
to prime the brain for cognitive training outcomes

Evidence of the reverse influence can also be seen
when increased cognitive functions such as increased
attention led to increased motor gains by increasing patient engagement [13, 14].
Thus, it is reasonable to expect that functional improvements in motor
and cognitive training would aid the improvement
of the other function. Therefore, instead of separate
cognitive and motor rehabilitation, we suggest that
future rehabilitation regimes should include motor
and cognitive training sessions and closely monitor
the improvement in both functions

s. While a few studies have noted that NFT helped
improve a multitude of different cognitive functions
by targeting EEG waves that serve important roles
in information processing, very little attention has
been paid to the interplay between the type of cognitive and motor deficit and their subsequent recovery

Overall, we note that it is
important to also study the relationship between the
types of cognitive and motor deficits which is currently not well explored in literature and possibly
incorporate them as important factors in designing
future holistic rehab trials.

BCI performance has been seen to be correlated with motivation of stroke subjects. Given the
implicit link between motivation and mood profile, increased motivation may help in increasing the
patient engagement during rehabilitation. This may
then result in better post-stroke rehabilitation outcomes. The reverse influence has also been suggested in literature wherein patients with better mood
profile showed better stroke rehabilitation outcomes.
Furthermore, when patients were specifically treated
for depressive treatments using pharmacotherapy,
the intervention group showed better rehabilitation
outcomes than the control group which did not
receive such treatment. Therefore, we hypothesise
that monitoring and treating affect-based disorders
within the rehabilitation program may have a significant influence on standard stroke rehabilitation practices. As mentioned earlier, NIBS techniques along
with BCIs may provide an effective mechanism to
improve the mood-profile of patients during rehabilitation which may then translate to better overall outcomes

On the basis of the above arguments and hypotheses, we further postulate that BCIs would be the
most effective modality to integrate the rehabilitation of various functions together into a single comprehensive treatment. Stroke-induced deficits and the
consequent improvements are seen as a result of
neuroplasticity and BCIs have demonstrated a tremendous ability to promote neuroplastic changes
using neurofeedback-based training. Therefore, BCIs
can serve as a common platform to simultaneously
target the multifaceted deficits of stroke by invoking
the implicit relationship between the motor, cognitive
and affect functions


Personalization is essential:
The use of a holistic BCI system should also
be accompanied with a neurophysiology-guided personalised rehabilitation plan. The heterogeneity in
the rehabilitation outcomes among stroke patients
indicates that the present rehabilitation practice of
‘one-fits-all’ may not result in best possible recovery
for every individual [10, 31, 158]. Therefore, every
patient should first be profiled using an all-inclusive
battery of clinical and neurophysiological assessments. Then a personalised rehabilitation program
should be designed based on the functional needs and
neurological biomarkers for every patient [10, 33].

Moreover, the type, dosage and frequency of the
rehabilitation sessions should be customised based on
the patients’ needs and capabilities [80]. Also, a continuous functional assessments should be performed
during the rehabilitation program to assess the effectiveness of the prescribed intervention which may then
be altered on reaching an intermediate recovery
plateau

anotacao minha: tempo é muito importante e pode mudar varias coisas, 
tratamento tem que ser adaptavel no tempo


#limitations:

For instance, neurofeedback
plays a very important role in BCI-based rehabilitation and a number of factors like feedback timing
and modality are key in determining the effectiveness of its delivery to the patient. Yet, few studies have
addressed this issue. It is possible that this relatively
challenging aspect may be a critical bottleneck that
could also benefit by further fine-tuning, personalization and/or adaptation. Another important area
which deserves attention is the calibration paradigms
used to collect data for building detection models
which are typically known to suffer from low subject
engagement. Moreover, just like more traditional
pharmacological treatments, factors such as treatment (dosage) frequency and intensity also need to be
studied in greater detail in order to further enhance
the effectiveness of BCI-based treatments. Furthermore, many studies typically have small sample sizes,
differences in time of intervention post-stroke and
type of controls. These factors make it very difficult to compare and draw conclusions across studies, thus limiting a true holistic understanding of the
effects of BCI-based stroke rehabilitation. These are
only a few of the various limitations faced by current studies that should be addressed in the near
future 

In conclusion, we propose that a BCI based holistic, personalized, longitudinal rehabilitation plan
which targets motor, cognitive and affect deficits all at
once may be the future of post-stroke rehabilitation.

7. Conclusions

BCIbased rehabilitation has been most widely used to
address motor impairments after stroke and have
shown to outperform most conventional forms of
treatment. Post-stroke cognitive training using BCI
has also shown encouraging results. Furthermore,
self-regulation of brain waves has been seen to influence the mood-profile of stroke patients. Neuroimaging evidence for functional and structural changes
accompanying clinical improvements following BCIbased rehabilitation suggest that BCI-based intervention promote restorative neuroplasticity. More
importantly, the cross-modal influence of functional recovery has been observed across motor,
cognitive and affect domains. Therefore, building
on the evidence accumulated, we propose a holistic,
all-inclusive treatment for stroke targeting motor,
cognitive and affect functions. Considering that all
the stroke-induced impairments originate from the
brain, a BCI-centric approach may thus be the most
appropriate and feasible modality to carry out such
a holistic rehabilitation program. Furthermore, we
recommend that an all-inclusive battery of clinical
and neurophysiological assessments be carried out to
comprehensively profile and develop a personalized
rehabilitation program

-------------------------------

title: Stroke rehabilitation *focus on clinic applications*

url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/Stroke%20rehabilitation.pdf

notes:

increase over the next two decades. Although impressive
developments have been made in the medical
management of stroke, without a widely applicable or
eff ective medical treatment most post-stroke care will
continue to rely on rehabilitation interventions.4

In this Review, we focus mainly on the evidence
underlying stroke rehabilitation, including the principles
of rehabilitation practice, systems of care, and specifi c
interventions. We also discuss the eff ects of interventions
for stroke-related impairment and disability. Questions
about these issues are the most common ones that are
posed by clinicians.5
 Most research of stroke rehabilitation
has been about the eff ect of interventions on recovery in
diff erent forms of impairment and disability.

#Classifi cation of the eff ect of stroke

Stroke recovery is heterogeneous in its nature. The
long-term eff ect of stroke is determined by the site and
size of the initial stroke lesion and by the extent of
subsequent recovery (fi gure 2). Recovery is a complex
process that probably occurs through a combination of
spontaneous and learning-dependent processes, including restitution (restoring the functionality of damaged
neural tissue), substitution (reorganisation of partlyspared neural pathways to relearn lost functions), and
compensation (improvement of the disparity between
the impaired skills of a patient and the demands of
their environment).8

Although patient outcome is
hetero geneous and individual recovery patterns diff er,
several cohort studies8,9 suggest that recovery of body
functions and activities is predictable in the fi rst days
after stroke.

#Rehabilitation after stroke

Stroke rehabilitation typically entails a cyclical
process1
 involving: (1) assessment, to identify and
quantify the patient’s needs; (2) goal setting, to defi ne
realistic and attainable goals for improvement;
(3) intervention, to assist in the achievement of goals;
and (4) reassessment, to assess progress against agreed
goals. The most widely recognised impairment caused
by stroke is motor impairment, which restricts function
in muscle movement or mobility.10 Other common
impairments include those of speech and language,
swallowing, vision, sensation, and cognition. Although
there seems to be a moderate non-linear relation
between impairment and function, particularly for
motor impairment,8,9,11 evidence of impairment-focused
therapies enhancing true neuro logical repair in the
human brain is still scarce. 

**By contrast, strong evidence
shows that task-oriented training can assist the natural
pattern of functional recovery, which supports the view
that functional recovery is driven mainly by adaptive
strategies that compensate for impaired body
functions.8,11,12Therefore, most rehab ilitation interventions seem to work best at the level to which they
are targeted (panel 1).**

#Challenges in evidence-based stroke
rehabilitation

First, although learning of skills and theories
of motor control are crucial to many rehabilitation interventions,12 the neurophysiology underpinning stroke
rehabilitation is often poorly established

Second, interventions tend to be complex and contain several
interrelated components.

Third, treatments might
target several diff erent problems from relieving very
specifi c impairments to improving activity and
participation.14 Interventions can occur at diff erent
points on a continuum of complexity ranging between
highly complex treatments (panel 2) and specifi c
treatments (panel 3).

Highly complex treatments include interventions that
are provided by more than one individual or by a single
operator (eg, a therapist or nurse). They comprise either
a complex package of treatment (eg, rehabilitation teams),
which is tailored to suit individual problems, or other
rehabilitation principles, such as goal setting. Specifi c
treatments comprise the assessment of individual
reproducible interventions, which are usually targeted at
specifi c stroke-related impairments—eg, constraintinduced movement therapy and treadmill gait-retraining
for walking. Although these treatments are not simple,
they can be regarded as less complex.

#Principles of stroke rehabilitation

4 Good rehabilitation outcome seems
to be strongly associated with high patient (and family)
motivation and engagement. Setting goals that replicate
the specifi c rehabilitation aims of an individual might
improve outcome. Although no extensive published work
yet exists for goal setting in stroke,42 research for other
disorders is more widespread.1

Task-specifi c and context-specifi c training are well
accepted principles in motor learning, which suggests
that training should target the goals that are relevant for
the needs of patients. Additionally, training should be
given preferably in the patient’s own environment (or
context). 

**Both learning rules are supported by various
systematic reviews, which indicate that the eff ects of
specifi c interventions generalise poorly to related tasks
that are not directly trained in the programme
**

Several systematic reviews have explored whether highintensity therapy improves recovery.5,56,57 Although there
are no clear guidelines for best levels of practice, the
principle that increased intensive training is helpful is
widely accepted.4

Agreement is widespread that
rehabilitation should begin as soon as possible after
stroke,68 and clinical trials of early commenced mobility
and speech interventions are underway. Recovery can
continue for months or years after stroke—well beyond
the formal rehabilitation period. How best to support
survivors once they stop accessing formal services is of
great importance. A systematic review83 of education
programmes for self-management in a general population
has shown positive benefi ts, but no stroke-specifi c
reviews were identifi ed

A package of rehabilitation
in an organised multidisciplinary stroke unit results
in more patients surviving, returning home, and
regaining independence in daily activities than does
rehabilitation in general wards

#Early supported discharge teams

In the past 15 years, clinical trials have explored whether
the discharge of patients with stroke from hospital can
be accelerated and an equivalent programme of
rehabilitation provided in their home settings—early
supported discharge. Such services have resulted in
patients returning home earlier with a reduced need for
long-term institutional care and an increased likelihood
of regaining independence in daily activities.17 Evidence
suggests that these services should be provided by
skilled multidisciplinary teams whose work is
coordinated by regular meetings.18 Services seem to be
most eff ective for a subgroup of patients with mild to
moderate disability;17,18 however, eff ective implementation of early supported discharge services is
complicated because of their potential interaction with
existing services

#Conclusions

Major advances have occurred in the past 20 years in the
development and testing of interventions for stroke
rehabilitation, but there are many gaps and shortcomings
in the evidence base to inform clinical practice. Therefore,
for the foreseeable future many clinical decisions will
continue to rely on the knowledge and judgment of
individual health professionals. Although improvements
in management have been noted, research is still needed
to clearly defi ne the eff ect of specifi c rehabilitation
interventions in a routine clinical setting. The
mechanisms that drive recovery of impairments and
disabilities, and their associated time limitations, need to
be better understood than they are now. Although animal
models of neuroplasticity suggest that training results in
an upregulation of growth-promoting factors mostly in
the fi rst 4 weeks after stroke,12 this process needs to be
further explored in human beings. What patients actually
learn during functional recovery in terms of restitution
of impairments and learning adaptive strategies should
also be further explored

**Task and
context specifi city should be understood to overcome
problems of poor transfer from one task to another. Trials
will need to clearly defi ne the target populations and
rehabilitation interventions because no individual
treatment is likely to be applicable to every patient **

Ongoing trials of repetitive task training, early
mobilisation, treadmill training, physical fi tness
training, and speech and language training for aphasia
and dysarthria are high-quality, multicentre, multidisciplinary studies of complex interventions, which
meet many of the above recommendations. The results
of these trials will hopefully provide better information
to guide future practice

-------------------------------


title: Understanding the Mechanisms of Recovery and/or
Compensation following Injury

url: file:///C:/Users/bruno/Desktop/Poli/TCC/projeto/estudo%20do%20problema/artigos%20(pdfs)/Mechanisms%20of%20recovery%20and%20compensation%20after%20injury.pdf

notes:

Injury due to stroke and traumatic brain injury result in significant long-term effects upon behavioral functioning. One central
question to rehabilitation research is whether the nature of behavioral improvement observed is due to recovery or the
development of compensatory mechanisms. The nature of functional improvement can be viewed from the perspective of
behavioral changes or changes in neuroanatomical plasticity that follows. Research suggests that these changes correspond to
each other in a bidirectional manner. Mechanisms surrounding phenomena like neural plasticity may offer an opportunity to
explain how variables such as experience can impact improvement and influence the definition of recovery. What is more, the
intensity of the rehabilitative experiences may influence the ability to recover function and support functional improvement of
behavior. All of this impacts how researchers, clinicians, and medical professionals utilize rehabilitation.

Still, defining recovery as simply returning to
normal life is a fairly limited concept in that it does not take
into account whether the individual is simply compensating
for their lost behaviors

 Foroud and Whishaw [5] analyzed
the kinematic profiles of two stroke patients during a reaching
task and found that while the patients were able to perform
the task, they demonstrated kinematic abnormalities during
reaching. Though in only two patients, this evidence of
compensatory limb use suggests a qualitatively different
functional outcome than true behavioral recovery.

Essentially, the goal of rehabilitation is often focused on
independence as opposed to the impairment, which may
lead to improved behavioral function but prevent true
behavioral recovery.

If we hope to improve the efficacy of
rehabilitative strategies following brain injury, it is important
to distinguish between true recovery and compensation and
to understand the consequences of each for long-term neural
and behavioral function. This review focuses on the anatomical and behavioral mechanisms surrounding the distinction
between recovery and compensation in the adult with the
aim of using this distinction to guide strategies for successful
rehabilitation. As the majority of human strokes are ischemic
in nature, we focus specifically on ischemic insult in the adult
(human, nonhuman primate, and rodent models) [26]. Traumatic brain injuries (TBI) have a fairly distinct pathological
response that is separate from stroke [27, 28]. While within
TBI characterization, focal and diffuse injuries have distinct
pathologies; most TBIs have elements of both types of injury
and are heterogeneous in nature making the distinction difficult from the perspective of recovery and treatment [29–31].
In addition, traumatic axonal injury has been shown to lead to
selective atrophy in a regional manner similar to what is
observed following focal injury [32]. This review considers
how the cognitive reserve applies to functional improvement
following injury and how the intensity of rehabilitation plays
a role in recovery and compensation.

#2. Neuroanatomical Effects of Damage upon
Recovery/Compensation

In understanding how compensatory strategies are developed, one must consider the anatomical and cellular events
that are associated with injury. Following unilateral brain
injury, there is a sequence of events that have devastating
effects upon the primary site of damage. Regardless of how
the damage occurs (e.g., ischemic stroke or TBI), this usually
begins with the interruption of the blood supply to the
brain, which causes cells to die through over excitation
due to excess glutamate release [33–38]. Following the initial
damage, tissues become swollen and inflamed, compromising the integrity of areas that are distant from the primary
site of damage [37, 39–42]. This swelling and inflammation
may cause deficits that will abate over time [43, 44]. There
is also a decrease in the metabolic activity in the ipsilesiona
hemisphere suggesting that the damage can impact areas distal to the injury, a phenomenon known as diaschisis [45–47].

While injury results in devastating events, it also induces
a cascade of growth-related events that enable remaining
neurons near and distant to the lesion locus to survive, repair,
and form new connections [48–53]. Some researchers have
even proposed that some of the events that occur following
damage are similar to what is observed during normal development, possibly suggesting that the brain has an intrinsic
ability to react to change [54–59]

 Changes in perilesion
cortex (i.e., the area of vulnerable but surviving tissue immediately around the lesion core), including cortical reorganization, neurogenesis, axonal sprouting, dendritic plasticity, and
angiogenesis, have been linked to spontaneous recovery of
behavioral deficits following the resolution of diaschisis as
described above [60–65]

Within the perilesion area, there
is also an increase in the expression of growth-promoting
genes which begins to be seen shortly after injury [66, 67].
This altered environment is arguably becoming growth
permissive, as increased axonal sprouting will occur in this
region [53, 68]. 

 Carmichael and Chesselet [71] found
that the increased axonal sprouting correlates with an altered
physiological response in the perilesion area. This increase in
synchronous activity is followed by activity in other cortical
regions associated with the damaged area including the
contralesional homotopic cortex. Further, it is likely that
the axonal sprouting and altered activity in this region is
what underlies reorganization of the remaining cortical representations in the perilesion area [42, 68, 71–75]

The perilesion area is not the only location that is altered
in response to injury. Frost et al. [21] found that following
lesions of the hand area of the primary motor cortex in
primates, there is an expansion of the hand area of the ventral
premotor cortex (PMv) in the same hemisphere [76]. This
increased expansion is associated with altered axonal sprouting from the PMv [72, 77]. Both of these changes are correlated
withimprovedmotor behavior. Following injury, the contralesional hemisphere also exhibits an increase in dendritic
growth [78–80] as well as increased sprouting of corticostriatal axons [78, 81]. Further, reorganization of contralesional hemisphere usually corresponds to increased synapse
number [82, 83]. Some authors have suggested that this
growth is the result of a compensatory behavioral response
(e.g., [80, 84]).

It appears that the brain is able to undergo neuroanatomical changes that lead to the reorganization of remaining
tissue following damage. However, this reorganization has
behavioral consequences that need to be considered when
determining whether recovery or compensation has occurred.

#3. Behavioral Effects of Recovery/Compensation

It should be noted that with
focused training of the impaired limb, animals often reach
preoperative performance levels [108–111], suggesting that
behavior can interact with naturally occurring plastic changes
following stroke to drive functional outcome

Often, behavioral changes are associated with the
presence of neuroanatomical changes in areas functionally
related to the damage. Following a unilateral lesion of the
sensorimotor cortex, there is an increased reliance upon the
unimpaired limb for movement and postural support which
coincides with increased dendritic growth in the contralesional hemisphere [46, 47, 79]. The increased growth peaks
at three weeks following injury, and pruning of this over
growth begins to occur over the next few weeks. The overreliance on the unimpaired limb will also begin to decrease
shortly after the dendritic pruning begins, possibly suggesting that the behavior of the animal over time following injury
influences the ability for plasticity to occur [103, 112]

Jones
and Schallert [80] tested this by restricting the movement
of the unimpaired limb and forcing the animal to use their
impaired limb. By restricting the unimpaired limb, the
increased growth was blocked suggesting that the plasticity
that occurs due to injury interacts with the behavioral

Although it is tempting to suggest
that the increased neuronal growth that is observed following
damage is beneficial as it is seen following improvements in
behavior, it is possible that the growth is promoting compensatory behaviors rather than true recovery [24, 118, 119],
which may be interfering with or even preventing true
recovery [84, 109, 120–122].

Forced use of the unimpaired limb following stroke,
mimicking compensatory use following injury, is associated
with decreased neuronal activation [123, 124] and further
reduction of forelimb movement representations in the
perilesion cortex [84]. Kim and colleagues report not only
decreased forelimb representation area in perilesion motor
cortex but also an increase in axodendritic synapses and multiple synaptic boutons following forced use of the unimpaired
limb (i.e., compensatory limb training) [84]. This synaptic
density negatively correlated with functional outcome of
the impaired limb, suggesting that aberrant synaptogenesis,
potentially of transcallosal projections, may contribute to
the poor functional outcome associated with compensatory
limb use following injury. Interestingly, animals that have
had callosal transections do not exhibit the compensatory
limb effect, with forced use of the unimpaired limb having
no impact on bad limb recovery [122]

Another way experimental researchers define recovery is
by whether the means (i.e., methods) to achieve a particular
end point following injury is similar to how it would be
performed in the intact animal [104]. Following injury, there
is an emergence of what has been regarded as “self-taught”
behaviors that develop spontaneously as behavioral deficits
begin to subside. These behaviors may develop as a response
to compensate for those behaviors lost as a result of injury
[125, 126]. For instance, following an ischemic injury to the
motor cortex, squirrel monkeys are unable to use their
affected hand in reaching for a pellet of food [64]. Over time,
there is a gradual return in the ability to use the limb, and this
improvement corresponds to reorganization of the motor
map [21, 72, 77, 127]. However, recovery of limb movement is due to the use of compensatory behavioral strategies
that are fundamentally different from preinjury strategies
[128–130]. Even more careful analysis has demonstrated
that although the ability to grasp has returned, there are
residual fine motor deficits that lead to the development of
compensatory movement of individual digits despite further
training [73, 131, 132].

In a similar vein, injury to the motor cortex in rats results
in an inability to successfully reach for a food pellet that
abates over time. Rats with motor cortex lesions are unable
to make rotational movements and demonstrate impaired
digit use [24]. A more detailed analysis of the reaching
behavior in rodents also suggests that even though lesioned
animals may regain use of the impaired limb, many qualitative aspects of the behavior are different [133]

Erickson et al. [135] suggested that animals are in a sense
“learning” that they are likely to be unsuccessful in reaching
for the pellet as there is a decline in the number of reaching
attempts during this period. This “learned nonuse” occurs
only in the acute stages following damage; 8 days post
damage, rats increase their number of reach attempts [135].
As animals show an increase in their number of reach
attempts, there is a corresponding increase in the number
of individually repeated gestures. An animal may advance
its limb and withdraw several times without ever grasping
the food. Even though there is an increase in the number of
attempts, if there is a reduction in the number of successful
reaches due to the additional gestures, this behavior could
be characterized as “learned bad-use” [136, 137]. Encouraging the unimpaired limb to be used can interfere with later
training of the impaired limb [109, 111, 120, 123, 138]. 

**
It is
possible that remaining motor systems take advantage of
the beneficial growth that occurs following ischemic injury,
which leads to increased use of the unimpaired limb. Interestingly, bilateral limb use (via either focused, skilled training
or home-cage enrichment that encourages dexterous use of
both limbs) ameliorates this effect, resulting in a restoration
of rehabilitative potential of the impaired limb [109, 123].
**

It may also be possible for behavioral substitution to
take place following injury-induced loss of behavior

Rauschecker [139] found that cats that were deprived of
vision early in life can solve a visual maze using tactile
sensation that is complimented by expanded cortical representation of their facial vibrissae. Therefore, in the absence
of one means for solving a task, it appears that another can
substitute and allow for the goal to be accomplished via sensory substitution or a different behavioral strategy

**
Part of the difficulty of determining whether true recovery has occurred in the experimental setting has been in the
analysis of the behavior. Some authors have even stated that
using just a few (often only one) behavioral measures may
lead to biased estimates of behavior and that a better assessment of behavior comes from using a “battery” of speciestypical and learned behaviors [105]. The use of simple “end
point” measures also limits the interpretation of whether a
motor behavior has returned [134, 136, 142]. Further, the
fractionation of more complex behaviors (e.g., reaching)
enables researchers to determine what is possible with regard
to recovery and whether animals are using compensatory
behaviors [134, 143].
**

As mentioned previously, most rehabilitative treatments
encourage the use of compensatory strategies following
injury. However, there are clinical studies of rehabilitative
therapies for motor deficits that have focused on training the
impaired limb following stroke [144–147]. Some researchers
have suggested that what is observed during natural recovery
is the development of compensatory behaviors and that“true”
recovery is possible following specific rehabilitative training
focused on the impairment rather than behavioral outcome
[148, 149]. Still, other researchers have taken an extreme
stance on the issue suggesting that when recovery is observed,
it is due to the reorganization of remaining areas that lead to
the development of compensatory behaviors [24]. Even if
the behavior is similar to preinjury conditions, the argument
is that the remaining functional areas now have to compensate
for the loss. Therefore, this argument posits that in order for
true recovery to occur, the neurons and their corresponding
neural connections that were lost during injury need to be
replaced rather than substituted [24, 150].
**

#4. The Role of Reserve after Brain Injury

**
In the field of brain injury, there remains a clear disconnect between brain trauma severity and clinical emergence
[151, 152]. A similar brain injury among two, separate individuals may not result in the same degree of behavioral
impairments. It has been proposed that this observation
could be a result of individual differences in a concept known
as cognitive reserve. Cognitive reserve (CR) is considered to
be an accumulation of complex neural networks that allows
for unique task processing in the brain [153]

CR can be
increased through a variety of mental activities that keep
the brain active. In other words, “exercising” or strengthening the brain’s neuronal connections leads to a large CR. This
“exercise” works to provide the brain with a more plastic and
varied neural circuitry. CR has been associated with characteristics such as a balanced diet, occupational complexity
[154], IQ [152], and participation in various lifestyle activities [155].
**

According to Murray et al. [156], level of education
can also be used as a marker for cognitive reserve. As such,
studies have shown that those with high levels of educational
attainment have been associated with greater short- and
long-term functional recovery after brain injury, in cases of
both ischemic stroke [157] and moderate/severe traumatic
brain injuries [158, 159].

Although, it must
be pointed out that the brain processing in those with high
CR is the same for all individuals [153]. The capacity of CR
may vary, but its way of action does not change. A larger
CR would give an individual a higher threshold for injury
and would require an injury of greater severity for clinical
symptoms to show [152]. However, research has shown that
CR positively influences functional recovery not only in
adults but also in children and adolescents [158]. It would
seem that a larger CR, at any age or time point during development, could help the brain to better sustain injuries [160]

Although, the literature also suggests that a CR of lower
capacity can exacerbate the secondary effects of brain injuries, particularly in instances of TBIs [158]. Therefore, CR
may serve as a preventative compensatory mechanism in
4 Neural Plasticity
order to keep the injury from producing further and unnecessary damage after brain injury.

There is the possibility that cognitive reserve may be acting as the nervous system’s natural means of compensation
after brain injury. Specifically, a large cognitive reserve could
provide a more convenient outlet for plasticity to occur,
allowing for the more efficient and established neural
connections to help the brain better sustain injuries because
of its higher level of threshold [159, 161]. In addition to compensatory action through an emphasis on well-established
connections, individuals that accumulate a strong CR
throughout their lifetime may have a brain that is unique in
neural organization in another way, such that the brain
communicates in a more holistic manner through a more
varied neural network rather than through a limited number
of possible neuronal pathways [154]. Since the level of redundancy is high in those with a large CR, it is unlikely that a
brain injury will disrupt all communicative routes, thereby
fostering a quicker, less intrusive cognitive recovery through
the utilization of alternative neural circuitry [162]. 

It remains
to be shown if cognitive reserve is a form of preventive
compensation (i.e., the brain is compensating for natural loss
because there is synaptic loss as we age and neurons compensate for the loss by increasing synaptic number) [163].
But if there is an injury, this compensation from natural
aging gets used up

#5. The Impact of Timing and Intensity on
Rehabilitation Efficacy

Following CNS injury, experience-induced plasticity (e.g.,
changes induced via rehabilitation) interacts with the natural
richly plastic environment described above. The ultimate
efficacy of rehabilitative training depends on how well coordinated those plastic events are. There are a number of
factors that may drive more functionally beneficial effects
of rehabilitative training, including the timing and intensity
of training

training.
As we have discussed, the injured brain can both promote
and inhibit neural plasticity. 

**In order to maximize the functional benefit of rehabilitative training, the timing of training
onset must coincide with a naturally more growth permissive
environment following injury. Identifying the ideal “window
of recovery” following injury is difficult, though research in
rodents suggests that there is an early vulnerable period
following injury during which training can have negative
effects on recovery and exacerbate neural damage.**

 For
instance, forced use of the impaired forelimb during the first
seven days following stroke results in poor functional outcome and larger lesion size compared to rats permitted to
engage either forelimb [164–166]. Similar results are found
with exercise as a rehabilitative strategy, with early exercise
reducing neuroplasticity-related molecules in the hippocampus following traumatic brain injury in rats. More
favorable outcomes are reported if the exercise is initiated
two weeks following TBI, with the same molecules being
upregulated and spatial memory improving [167, 168].
Early exercise can also be problematic following ischemic
stroke causing increased apoptosis and impaired learning
performance [169, 170].

Together, these findings suggest that the ideal time to
introduce symptom-specific, skilled rehabilitative training
is early, but not immediately, after insult. However, the
exact time window for beneficial structural and functional
outcomes is still unclear

 It is important that we continue
to explore the regenerative and degenerative responses of the
brain to injury and how these responses interact with
behaviorally induced experience-dependent plasticity to drive
functional outcome

Another factor that affects behavioral outcome following
injury is the intensity of rehabilitative training. In the intact
brain, training intensity impacts both the rate of behavioral
change as well as the neural consequences associated with
new learning. For instance, mice that receive twice daily
motor skill training sessions exhibit a faster acquisition of
the skill [174]. MacLellan and colleagues (2011) found that
enriched rehabilitation (skilled reaching combined with
enriched housing) was only effective in improving functional
recovery when enrichment was provided during the more
active dark cycle, when rats are more likely to engage with
enrichment options at higher intensity [175]. The researchers
suggest that there may be a threshold of rehabilitation that is
necessary to provide functional benefits. Similarly, Bell et al.
[108] found that twice-daily training on the Pasta Matrix
Reaching Task (i.e., skilled rehabilitative training) was more
beneficial for functional outcome than once-daily training
sessions. Specifically, high-intensity training resulted in a faster return to preoperative performance levels [108]. Results
from these studies suggest that high-intensity rehabilitative
training, initiated early after insult, would be the most effective strategy to employ in humans. 

**
It should be noted that
current rehabilitative regimens in humans are considerably
less intense than those practiced in animal models [22]
**

#6. Conclusions

Although the proceeding discussion has focused on compensation/recovery following injury, it is likely that these
mechanisms reflect a natural phenomenon that allows an
organism to constantly adapt to an ever-changing environment rather than exclusively occurring following injury

In most normal situations for solving
a task, there is a hierarchy of behaviors in order to successfully complete it. If, for instance, an individual is blindfolded,
they may still be able to complete a maze through the use of
tactile or auditory cues [98]. Also, if a “normal” individual is
blindfolded and taught to tacitly discriminate for a prolonged
period, there is a temporary increase in activity present in the
occipital cortex when tactile stimulation is given [176].

The plastic changes that occur following injury are strikingly similar to those that are observed in normal brains following learning or other experiences [105, 177]

The plastic changes that occur following injury are strikingly similar to those that are observed in normal brains following learning or other experiences [105, 177]

Therefore, one possible method to understand the
changes associated with recovery/compensation is observing
situations where plasticity normally occurs. However, future
work needs to focus on determining and defining what
entails complete recovery and whether it is possible for it to
occur naturally or through the use of therapeutic intervention or if compensation is the only possibility.



==========================================
